 yahaan nokia ke utpaadon kii aanshik suchi di ja rahi he. yah suchi nokia ke aadhunik phone va mobile utpaadon par kendrit he. nokia anya vidhut upkaran jaise kii televijan vagrah bhi banaata he.
 phone main boldphase se arth he ki phone simbian operating system par aadhaarit he, jise smartphone.S = Status, where P indicates under production, and D is discontinued
 Like the 1000 series, the 2000 series are entry-level phones. However, the 2000 series generally contain more advanced features than the 1000 series; many new 2000 series phones feature color screens and some feature cameras and/or Bluetooth. The 2000 series slot between the 1000 and 3000 series phones in terms of features.
 The nokia 3000 series are mostly mid-range phones targeted towards the youth market. Some of the models in this series are targeted towards young male users, in contrast with the more unisex business-oriented 6000 series and the more feminine fashion-oriented 7000 series. Feature wise, the 3000 series slot between the 2000 and 6000 series.
 The nokia 5000 series are similar in features to the 3000 series, but often contain more features towards active individuals. Many of the 5000 series phones feature a rugged construction or contain extra features for music playback.
 The 5210 features rubber Xpress-On shells, WAP over CSD and a built in thermometer. The thermometer is actually the internal temperature of the phone's battery, this feature is also present on other phones that have "netmonitor" enabled. The 5210 is nicknamed a "builder's phone" because of its rubber splash/impact proof casing. Its successor is the 5100 and after that, the 5140 and 5140i.
 The 5510 was nokia's first phone with a built in MP3 player, and it had 64 megabytes of memory for storing MP3s. It also had a full QWERTY keyboard and an 84 x 48 monocrome display. This phone did not sell very well even though it was advertised on television, possibly because it was too expensive and too big. Its replacement is the nokia 3300.
 The nokia 6000 series is nokia's largest family of phones. It consists mostly of mid-range to high-end phones containing a high amount of features. The 6000 series is notable for their conservative, unisex designs, which make them popular among business users.
 nokia 6136 UMA is the first mobile phone to include Unlicenced Mobile Access. nokia 6131 NFC is the first mobile phone to include Near Field Communication.
 The nokia 7000 series is a family of nokia phones with two uses. Most phones in the 7000 series are targeted towards fashion-conscious users, particularly towards women. Some phones in this family also test new features. The 7000 series are considered to be a more consumer-oriented family of phones when contrasted to the business-oriented 6000 series.
 The 7110 was the first nokia phone with a WAP browser. WAP was significantly hyped up during the 1998-2000 Internet boom. However WAP did not meet these expectations and uptake was limited. Another industry first was the flap, which slid from beneath the phone with a push from the release button. Unfortunately the cover was not too durable. The 7110 was also the only phone to feature a navi-roller key.
 The 7250i was a slightly improved version of the nokia 7250. It includes XHTML and OMA Forward lock digital rights management. The phone has the exact same design as the 7250. This phone is far more popular than the 7250 and has been made available on pre-paid packages and therefore it is very popular amongst youths in the UK and other European countries.
 The 7650 was the first Series 60 smartphone of nokia. It was quite basic compared to new smartphones, it didn't have MMC slot, but it had a camera.
 The 7610 was nokia's first smartphone featuring a megapixel camera, and is targeted towards the fashion conscious individual. End-users can also use the 7610 with nokia Lifeblog. Other pre-installed applications include the Opera and Kodak Photo Sharing. It is notable for its looks, having opposite corners rounded off. It comes with a 64 MB Reduced Size MMC. The main CPU is an ARM compatible chip running at 123 MHz.
 The 7710's 640 x 320 screen is a touch screen.
 This series is characterized by ergonomics and attractiveness. The internals of the phone are similar to those in different series and so on that level offer nothing particularly different, however the physical handset itself offers a level of functionality which appeals to users who focus on ergonomics. The front slide keypad covers offered a pseudo-flip that at the time nokia were unwilling to make. Materials used increased the cost and hence exclusivity of these handsets.
 The only exception to the rule is the 82xx, 8310 which were very small and light handsets.
 The newest Communicator, the E90 Communicator, is an Eseries phone.
 Vertu is an independent company, owned by nokia, that manufactures exclusively hand crafted high-end mobile phones.
 Materials used include platinum, 18 carat white gold, 18 carat yellow gold, stainless steel, ruby keypad bearings, and a sapphire crystal display for the 'Signature' and leather, 316L Surgical stainless steel and Liquidmetal for the 'Ascent'.
 nokia is working toward the future of phones and mobile communication devices with their new concept phone, the nokia "Scentsory". This new mobile device uses the sense of smell, sight, hearing, and touch to create a multiscensory environment for the caller. Scentsory would be able to detect, send, and emit smells, as well as radiate colors, lighting, and temperature from the environment of the caller. Dual screens can be used for personal video messaging as well as watching videos. 
 Scentsory also includes features such as an LED touchpad, hidden camera, and folding "origami" design, revolutionizing not only features previously foreign to the phone, but introducing a new physical design to the phone.
 IP appliances run IPSO FreeBSD based operating system, work with Check Point's firewall and VPN products. nokia Network Voyager is an SSL-secured, Web-based element management interface.
 In 2004, nokia began offering their own SSL VPN appliances based on IP Security Platforms and the pre-hardened nokia IPSO operating system. Client integrity scanning and endpoint security technology was licensed from Positive Networks.
 On August 24, 2009, nokia announced that they will be entering the PC business with a high-end netbook called the nokia Booklet 3G.
 nokia produces accessories to their products too many to list here. Such accessories include:
 nokia manufactured a series of personal computers in the 1980s.
 nokia was also known for producing very high quality CRT and early TFT LCD displays for PC and larger systems application. The nokia Display Products' branded business was sold to ViewSonic in 2000.
 nokia used to manufacture digital set-top boxes.
 nokia has also developed the Sanomalaitejärjestelmä for Finnish Defence Forces. It includes:
 In the past, nokia has produced at one time or another:<ref name="Towards Telecommunications
