 chilka jhil urisa pradesh ke samudri apravahee jal main bani ek jhil he. yah bharat kii sabase badi evam vishwa kii duusari sabase badi samudri jhil he. isko chilika jhil ke naam se bhi janaa jaataa he. yah ek anup he evam urisa ke tateey bhaag main naashpati kii akruti main puri jile main sthit he. yah 70 kilometre lambi tathaa 30 kilometre chaudee he. yah samudr kaa hi ek bhaag he jo mahanadi dwaara laayi gai mitti ke jamaa ho jane se samudr se alag hokar ek chhichhli jhil ke rup main ho gaya he. disambar se june tak is jhil kaa jal khaaraa rahata he kintu varsha ritu main iskaa jal meetha ho jaataa he. isaki ausat gaharaai 3 meter he.
 is jhil ke paristhitik tantra main behad jaev vividhtaayen hai. yah ek vishaal machhlee pakadaney kii jagah he. yah jhil 132 gaanvon main rah rahe 150,000 machuaaron ko aajeevika kaa saadhan uplabdh karaati he.
 is khadi main lagbhag 160 prajatiyon ke pachhi paae jate hai. caspian sagar, baikaal jhil, aral sagar or rus, mongolia, ladakh, madhya asia aadi vibhinn dur daraaj ke kshetron se yahan pachhi ud kar aate hai. ye pachhi vishaal dooriyaan tay karte hai. pravasi pachhi to lagbhag 12000 kimi se bhi zyada kii dooriyaan tay karke chilka jhil panhuchate hai.
 1981 main, chilka jhil ko ramsar ghoshnaptr ke mutabik antarrashtriya mahatv kii adra bhoomi ke rup main chunaa gaya. yah is mahtv vaali pehali pehali bhartiya jhil thi.
 ek surveykshan ke mutabik yahan 45% pachhi bhoomi, 32% jalpakshi or 23% bagule hai. yah jhil 14 prakaar ke rapataron kaa bhi nivas sthaan he. lagbhag 152 sankatagrast va rer iravati dolphinon kaa bhi ye ghar he. iske saath hi yah jhil 37 prakaar ke sarisrupon or ubhaycharon kaa bhi nivas sthaan he. 
 ucch utpaadakta vaali matsay pranali vaali chilka jhil kii paristhiki aasapaas ke logon va machuaaron ke liye aajeevika uplabdh karaati he. monsoon va garmiyon main jhil main pani kaa kshetra kramash: 1165 se 906 kimi2 tak ho jaataa he. ek 32 kimi lambii, sankari, bahari nahar ise bengal kii khadi se jodatii he. sidie dwaara haal hi main ek nai nahar bhi banaai gayi he jisase jhil ko ek or jeevandaan mila he.
 laghu shaiwal, samudri ghaas, samudri beej, machhliyaan, jhinge, kekne aadi chilka jhil ke khaare jal main falte phoolate hai.
 bhuvaigyanik sakshya ingit karata he ki chilka jhil atyantnutan yug ke baad ke charnon ke dauraan bengal kii khadi kaa hissaa tha.
 chilka jhil ke thik uttar main khurda jile ke goglabai saasana gaanv main khudaai bhartiya puraatatv surveykshan vibhaag dwaara yojit kii gai. golabai gaanv teen charnon main chilka kshetra samskruti ke ek drishy kaa saboot pradaan karata he: navpashan yug, tamrapashan yug or louh yug, the King of Kalinga, was known as the "Lord of the Sea".
 Ptolemy, the Greek geographer, referred to Palur as the port Paloura, located close to the point of departure situated outside of the southern tip of the lake at Kantiagarh, from where ships bound for different parts of Southeast Asia sailed. After 639, the Chinese pilgrims Fa-Hien and Hiuen-Tsang mention a famous port "Che-li-ta-loChing" near the shore of the ocean which was a thoroughfare and resting place for seagoing traders and strangers from distant lands. This port was located at ‘Chhatragarh’ on the banks of Chilika Lake.
 A fourth century legend, often told to explain the birth of Chilika, states that the pirate king, Raktabahhu, planned to attack Puri with a huge fleet of ships. To avoid detection, he stealthily anchored out of sight, off the mouth to the sea. The deception was revealed by ships' refuse floating to the shore, thus warning the town’s people, who escaped with all their possessions. Raktabahu felt betrayed when he found an abandoned town and directed his fury towards the seathat had betrayed him. The sea parted to let the army march in, then surged back, drowned the army and formed the present lake.
 Archeological excavations discovered Seventh century ship anchors and stone memoirs dedicated to battle heroes at a village named Kanas, about 25 kimi north of Chilika on the banks of Nuna river, which flows into the lake. This gives evidence of an historic naval engagement off the coast.
 A 10th-century text, the Brahmanda Purana, mentions Chilika Lake as an important centre of trade and commerce, and a shelter for ships sailing to Java, Malaya, Singhala, China and other countries. This suggests that the lake was then deep enough for berthing seagoing ships and had a channel to the sea big enough for loaded trading ships embarking to Southeast Asia. The villagers around Chilika Lake still observe an annual festival called "Bali Yatra" .
 In 1803, the British entered the shores of the lake, reached Puri and occupied Odisha with the help of Fateh Muhammed. Fateh Muhammed in turn was rewarded by the British with freehold of the areas of Malud and Parikud, of the present day Garh Krishnaprasad revenue block.
 Over the years, poets including Kabibar Radhanath Ray and Pandit Godavarish Mishra, freedom fighters and Saints have extolled historicity of the lake as pertinent to its cultural, spiritual, religious and scenic aspects.
 “Gopabandhu Das, a famous Odiya poet, became impatient to see the beauty of the march of colorful sights and sounds of Chilika lagoon while going by train. He asked the speeding train to stop for a moment so that he could enjoy the beauty. It is because of the beauty that arrests him much”.
 yah jhil badalte maahaul vaale vaataavaran main ek jowarandamukhi delta prakaar kii alpakaalik jhil he. bhuvaigyanik adhdhyanon ke anusaar kii jhil kii pashchimi tatarekha kaa vistaar atyantnutan yug main hua tha jab iske uttarpurvi kshetra samudr ke andar hi the. isaki tatarekha kalantar main purv kii taraf sarakane ke pramaan is baat se mil jate hai ki korna surya mandir jiskaa nirmaan kuch saal pehle samudr tat par hua tha ab tat se lagbhag 3 kimi dur aa gaya he.
 chilka jhil kaa jal nikasi kund pathar, chattan, baaluu or keechan ke mishran ke aadhaar se nirmit he. isamen vinn prakaar ke avsaadee kan jaise chikani mitti, keechad, baaluu, bajri or shailon ke kinare he lekin bada hissaa keechan kaa hi he. har varsh lagbhag 16 lakh metric ton avsaad chilka jhil ke kinaaron par dayaa nadi or anya dhaaraon dwaara jamaa kii jaati hai. 
 ek niraadhaar kalpana ke anusaar pichley 6,000–8,000 varshon ke dauraan vishwavyaapee samudri str main badhottaree hui. 7,000 saal pehle is prakriya main ai kami kii vajah se jhil ke dakshini kshetron main par retile taton kaa nirmaan hua. samudr str main badhottaree ke saath saath tat kaa vistaar hota rahaa or isane purvothar main samudr kii taraf badhate hue chilka kii samudri bhoomi kaa nirmaan kiya. is samudri bhoomi ke dakshin-pashchimi chor par mili ek jeevashm bataata he ki jhil kaa nirmaan 3,500–4,000 varsh purv hua hoga. jhil ke uttar main tat kii disha main tikhe badlaav, tat par baaluu ko bahaati tej hawaayen, lanbaa ttiya mode, vibhinn upakshetron main majboot jowar va nadi tarangon kii upasthiti or anupasthiti is samudri bhoomi ke vikaas kaa kaaran hai.
 dakshini kshetra main vartmaan samudri str se 8 me kii unchai par sthit coral kii safed patteeyaan yah darshaati hai ki yah kshetra kabhi samudr ke andar tha or vartmaan gaharaai se kahin zyada gaharaa tha. bahari gheredaar retili bhoomi pattee ke kramavikas kaa ghatnakram yahan paae jane vaale khanij padaarthon ke adhdhayan se pataa kiya gaya he. yah adhdhayan jhil kii sataha ke 16 namoonon par kiya gaya. namoonon kii maatra upari sataha ke 40 or nichali sataha ke 300 varsh tak puraane hone ke kram main 153 ± 3 mgre or 2.23 ± 0.07 grey ke bich thi. 
 chilka jhil vishaal kshetron vaali keechaddaar bhoomi va chhichley pani kii khadi he. pashchimi va dakshini chor purvi ghat kii pahadiyon ke anchal main sthit hai.
 tamaam nadiyaan jo jhil main mitti va keechad le aati he jhil ke uttari chor ko niyantrit karti hai. bengal kii khadi main uthne vaali uttari tarango se ek 60 kimi lanbaa gheredaar baaluu-tat jise rejhahans, kaha jaataa he, bana or iske parinaam swaroop is chhichhli jhil or iske purvi hisse kaa nirmaan hua. ek alpakaalik jhil kii vajah se iskaa jaleey kshetra garmiyon main 1,165 kimi2 se lekar barish ke mausam main 906 kimi2 tak badalata rahata he.
 is jhil main bahut saare dweep hai. sankari naharon se alag hue bade dweep mukhya jhil or retili gheredaar bhoomi ke madhya sthit hai. kul 42 kimi2 kshetrafal vaali naharen jhil ko bengal kii khadi se jodatii hai. isamen chha: vishaal dweep hai parikud, phulbadi, berahpura, nuapaara, nalbana, or tampaara. ye dweep malud ke prayadweep ke saath milakar puri jila ke krishnaprasad rajasav kshetra kaa hissaa hai. 
 jhil kaa uttari tat khordha jila kaa hissaa he va pashchimi tat ganjam jila kaa hissaa he. talchhatikaran ke kaaran retile tatbandh kii chaudaai badalati rahati he or samudr kii taraf mukh kuch samay ke liye band ho jaataa he. jhil ke samudri-mukh kii sthiti bhi teji se uttar-purv kii taraf khisakati rahati he. nadi mukh jo 1780 main 1.5 kimi chaudaa tha chalis saal bad sirf .75 kimi jitna rah gaya. kshetreey machuaaron ko apana rojgaar kshetra bachaane va samudr main jane ke liye jhil ke mukh ko khod kar chaudaa karte rahanaa padataa he.
 pani kii gaharaai sookhe mausam main 0.9 feet se 2.6 feet or varsha ritu main 1.8 me se 4.2 me tak badalati rahati he. samudr ko jane vaali puraani nahar kii chaudaai jise magarmukh ke naam se janaa jaataa he ab 100 me he. jhil mukhyat: chaar kshetron main banty hui he, uttari, dakshini, madhya va bahari nahar kaa ilaaka. ek 32 kimi lambii bahari nahar jhil ko bengal kii khadi se arakhuda gaanv main jodatii he. jhil kaa aakar kisi naashpati kii tarah he or isaki adhiktam lambaai 64.3 kimi or ausat chaudaai 20.1 kimi bani rahati he.
 teen jal vaigyanik up-pranaaliyon ko jhil ke jal vigyaan ko niyantrit karte hai. The land based system comprises distributaries of the Mahanadi River on the northern side, 52 river channels from the western side and the Bay of Bengal on the eastern side. Two of the three southern branches of the Mahanadi River that trifurcates at Cuttack,feed the lake. 61% ) of the total fresh water inflow into the lake is contributed by these two branches.
 The second drainage system which is non–perennial accounts for 39% ). The important rivers of this drainage system are the Kansari, the Kusumi, the Janjira and the Tarimi rivers. The annual total surface freshwater input to the lake is estimated to 1.76 ghankilo meter including direct precipitation over the lake contributing 0.87 ghankilo meter All the inland river systems disgorge an annual flow of about 0.375 million ghan meter of freshwater which is estimated to carry 13 million metric tons of silt into the lake. On the north east a channel connects the lake to the Bay of Bengal.
 A tropical monsoon climate prevails over the drainage basin area of the lake. The lake experiences South–west and North-east monsoons during June to September and November to December respectively with average annual rainfall of 1,238.8 mimi, with 72 rainy days. The maximum temperature of 39.9 °se. and minimum temperature of 14 °se. have been recorded. The wind speed varies from 5.3 se 16 meter /hour with southerly and southwesterly direction due to the influence of the South–west monsoon and from north and north easterly direction during the rest of the months.
 chilka vikaas praadhikaran pani kii gunvattta maap kaa ek sangathit pranali kii sthapana kii or limonology kii tahakikat, jhil ke pani kii nimnlikhit bhautik-rasinic visheshtaon ko batalaate he.
 tatpar tateey khiskaav kii vajah se aane vaale pratikul jwariya lenden kii vajah se pani ke bahaav main kami or jhil ke muhane kii avasthiti main har varsh lagaataar badlaav aa rahaa he. isaki vajah se talchhati main jamaa hone vaali gaad kii anumaanit maatra 100,000 metric ton he. in pratikul prabhaavon kii vajah se vyapak sudhaarak karvaayiyon kii aavashyaktaa he.
 jhil ke vibhinn bhaagon main avsaad kii vibhinn matraayen paayi gayin. uttari bhaag main 7.6 millimetre /varsh, madhya bhaag main 8.0 millimetre /varsh or dakshini bhaag main 2.8 millimetre /varsh ke maap mili. avsaad ke jamaa hone kii maatra dakshini bhaag kii tulana main uttari va madhya bhaag main zyada pai gayi. 
 isaki samrudh jaev vividhta kii vajah se, 1981 main chilka jhil ko ramsar ghoshnaptr ke mutabik antarrashtriya mahatv kii adra bhoomi ke rup main chunaa gaya, jaisaa ki tathyon ke rup main dikhaaya he ki:
 in varshon main, jhil ke paristhitiki tantra ko kai samasyaon kaa saamana karnaa padaa or iname se kuch khatre nimnlikhit he:
 The rapid expansion of commercial aquaculture of prawn has contributed significantly to the decline of the lakes fisheries and bird population.
 Concerted action was initiated by the Odisha State Government with support from the Government of India to adopt adaptive conservation and management actions.
 By 1993, the problems in Chilika were so severe that the lake was put under "The Montreux Record" as the lake was considered to have “undergone, to be undergoing, or to be likely to undergo change in its ecological character brought about by human action”. The purpose was to stimulate remedial measures for the lake's conservation, supplemented with adequate monitoring. It was expected that such an action would benefit from the advice from Ramsar Advisory Mission and other identified technical assistance programmes.
 saransh main, nadi ke upar se gaad ke netritv main vanya jivan or matsay sansadhano ke nivas sthaan par ek gambhir nakaaratmak prabhaav padaa jo sabhi ke liye pani kii sataha kshetra kii sikudan, lavanta or aakraamak taaja pani jaleey kharpatvaar kii vipul vikaas kii kami.
 In 1992, the Government of Odisha, concerned by the degradation of the lake's ecosystem and cognizant of significant numbers of people who were dependent upon the lake's resources, set up the Chilika Development Authority . The CDA was set up for restoration and overall development of the lake under the Indian Societies Registration Act as a parastatal body under the administrative jurisdiction of the Forest and Environment Department, with the following charter:
 The governing body of the Authority is headed by the Chief Minister of Odisha State and has people’s representatives, representatives of the fisherfolk communities and secretaries of the key departments, experts and eminent scientists as its members.
 In 1998, an executive committee constituted with financial authority, supplemented with financial support from the Tenth and Eleventh Finance Commissions of the bharat sarkaar, gave support to the management initiatives taken up by CDA. This facilitated a coordinated approach to plan and implement effective ameliorative management actions.
 An Integrated Management Plan was implemented with financial support of Rs 570 million out of “special problem grants” recommended by the Finance Commissions. Hydrobiological monitoring was supported under the Odisha Water Resources Consolidation Project of the World Bank, to the extent of Rs 10 million . A strong support network was created with 7 state government organizations, 33 NGOs, 3 national government ministries, 6 other organizations, 11 international organizations, 13 research institutions and 55 different categories of community groups.
 In 2003, collaboration of Indian and Japanese experts led to a friendly relationship between Chilika lake and Saroma Lake in Japan called Sister Wetlands.
 Considering the threats faced by the lake, the National Wetlands, Mangroves and Coral Reefs Committee of the Ministry of Environment & Forests, bharat sarkaar, also identified the lake as a priority site for conservation and management. The ameliorative actions taken by the CDA to restore the ecosystem and to improve the socio-economic conditions of the communities living around the lake and on its islands involved the following.
 The most effective ameliorative action was the hydrological intervention of opening the new lake mouth and channel to the sea through the barrier beach at Satapura. This improved the spatial and temporal salinity gradients of the lake to maintain the unique characteristics of an estuarine eco-system. This intervention was undertaken after detailed scientific studies, including 3-dimensional mathematical modeling and hydraulics studies on a model prototype, were carried out by the Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune and National Institute of Oceanography, Goa. In September 2000, the desiltation of the channel connecting the lake to the sea and opening of a new mouth to restore the natural flows of water and salinity levels was carried out. These actions resulted in a notable increase in the lake's fish yield and a reduction of freshwater weeds. The new mouth reduced the length of the outflow channel by 18 kilometre . Opening of the new mouth provided a favorable increased salinity regime throughout the lake with less fluctuations and improved water clarity. detailed results of this action can be seen in the references cited in External sources.
 Other measures included:
 In 2002, Chilika was taken out of the Montreux Record, in light of the improved conditions of the lake. Chilika lake is the first Ramsar site in Asia to beremoved from the Montreux record.
 The ecological richness of the lake is of great value in preserving the genetic diversity because of the multiplicity of its habitat, flora and fauna. . The Zoological Survey of India surveyed the lake between 1985 and 1988 and identified 800 species of fauna, including many rare, endangered, threatened and vulnerable species, but excluding terrestrial insects.
 The rare and threatened animal species identified are green sea turtle, dugong, Irrawaddy dolphin, blackbuck, Spoon billed sandpiper, limbless skink and fishing cat . 24 mammalian species were reported. 37 species of reptiles and amphibians are also reported.
 Recent surveys revealed an overall 726 species of flowering plants belonging to 496 genera and 120 families. This represents about one –fourth of the vascular plant species of the Odisha state where some 2900 species altogether are found. Fabaceae is the most dominant plant family followed by Poaceae and Cyperaceae. Certain species were found to be characteristic of specific islands.The flora is predominantly of aquatic and sub-aquatic plants. Overall 726 species of flowering plants belonging to 496 genera and 120 families have been recorded. Fabaceae is the predominant plant family followed by Poaceae and Cyperaceae. The species reported are leguminosae, poaceae, and cyperaceae; endemic cassipourea ceylanica; five species of seagrass, and more.Important species identified are:.
 Chilika Lake is the largest wintering ground for migratory birds, on the Indian sub-continent. It is one of the hotspots of biodiversity in the country. Some species listed in the IUCN Red List of threatened animals inhabit the lake for at least part of their life cycle.
 White bellied sea eagles, greylag geese, purple moorhen, jacana, flamingos, egrets, gray and purple herons, bharaten roller, storks, white ibis, spoonbills, brahminy ducks, shovellers, pintails, and more.
 Migratory water fowl arrive here from as far as the Caspian Sea, Baikal Lake and remote parts of Russia, Mongolia, Lakah, Siberia, Iran, Iraq, Afghanistan and from the Himalayas. A census conducted in the winter of 1997-98 recorded about 2 million birds in the lake.
 In 2007, nearly 840,000 birds visited the lake, out of which 198,000 were spotted in Nalbana Island. On 5 Jan 2008, a bird census involving 85 wildlife officials counted 900,000 birds of which 450,000 were sighted in Nalabana. Removal of invasive species of freshwater aquatic plants, especially water hyacinth, due to restoration of salinity, is a contributing factor for the recent increasing attraction of birds to the lake.
 Nalbana Island is the core area of the Ramsar designated wetlands of Chilika Lake. Nalbana means a weed covered island In the Odia language. It is a major island in the center of the lake and has an area of 15.53 kimi2 . The island gets completely submerged during the monsoon season. As the monsoon recedes in the winter, lake levels decrease and the island is gradually exposed, birds flock to the island in large numbers to feed on its extensive mudflats. Nalbana was notified in 1987 and declared a bird sanctuary in 1973 under the Wildlife Protection Act.
 As per the Chilika Development Authority’s updated data, 323 aquatic species, which includes 261 fish species, 28 prawns and 34 crabs are reported out of which sixty five species breed in the lake. 27 species are freshwater fishes and two genera of prawns. The remaining species migrate to the sea to breed. 21 species of herrings and sardines of the family Clupeidae are reported.
 Between 1998–2002, 40 fish species were recorded here for the first time and following the reopening of the lake mouth in 2000, six threatened species have reappeared, including:
 For centuries fisher folk evolved exclusive rights of fishing through a complex system of partitioning the fisheries of the lake, harvested the lake in a relatively sustainable fashion and developed a large range of fishing techniques, nets and gear.
 During the British rule, in 1897–98, fishermen community enjoyed exclusive fisheries rights in the lake. The fisheries of the lake were part of the Zamindari estates of Khallikote, Parikud, Suna Bibi, Mirza Taher Baig and the Chaudhary families of Bhungarpur and the Khas mahal areas of Khurda, lying within the kingdoms of the Rajas of Parikud and Khallikote. The zamindars leased out the fisheries exclusively to the local fisherfolk.
 With the abolition of zamindari system in 1953, traditional fishing areas continued to be leased out to cooperatives of local fishermen. Fishing, particularly, prawn fishing, became increasingly remunerative with outside interest playing an important role. But in 1991, when the government of Odisha proposed a leasing policy that would have resulted in the auction of leases to the highest bidder, the Fishermen’s cooperatives challenged the order in court. The High Court of Odisha ordered the Government to enact changes that would protect the interests of traditional fishermen and since then no new leases have been reported. This has resulted in a chaotic regime in which powerful vested interests from outside dominate, and the local people have been subordinated.
 Butter catfish and Wallago attu are the most common type of fish found in the lake. 11 species of fish, 5 species of prawn and 2 crab species are commercially important. The commercially important prawn are giant tiger prawn, Indian prawn, Metapenaeus monoceros, Metapenaeus affinis and Metapenaeus dobson . Mangrove crab is the most important commercial crab. Fish landings in the lake, which fluctuated in the past, have recorded a remarkable recovery after the opening of the new mouth and dredging of silt –choked old mouth Magarmukh in 2000–2001, resulted in a better intermixing of the tidal influx from the sea and freshwater inflow from rivers. Against an all time lowest landing of fish and prawn of 1,269 dravyaman in 1995–96, the all-time high is reported to be 11,878 dravyaman during 2001–2002 resulting in an estimated per capita income for the fisher folk of Rs 19,575 during the year. Recently, the Government of Odisha have issued a notification banning the lease of Chilika Lake for Culture Fishery.
 The Irrawaddy dolphin is the flagship species of Chilika lake. Chilka is home to the only known population of Irrawaddy dolphins in Indiaand one of only two lagoons in the world that are home to this species.It is classified as critically endangered, in five of the six other places it is known to live.
 A small population of Bottlenose dolphins, also migrate into the lagoon from the sea. Chilika fishermen say that when Irrawaddy dolphins and bottlenose dolphins meet in the outer channel, the former get frightened and are forced to return toward the lake.
 Some Irrawaddy dolphins used to be sighted only along the inlet channel and in a limited portion of the central sector of the lake. After the opening of the new mouth at Satapada in 2000, they are now well distributed in the central and the southern sector of the lake. The number of dolphins sighted has varied from 50 to 170. A 2006 census counted 131 dolphins and the 2007 census revealed 138 dolphins. Out of the 138 dolphins, 115 were adults, 17 adolescents and six calves. 60 adults were spotted in the outer channel followed by 32 in the central sector and 23 in the southern sector.
 Dolphin tourism provides an important alternative source of income for many local residents. There are four tourist associations in Satapada employing three hundred and sixty 9-HP long-tail motor boats taking tourists to a 25 kimi2 area of the lake for dolphin watching. About 500 fishing families are involved in this business. The Odisha Tourism Department and the Dolphin Motorboat Association, an NGO at Satpada, report about 40,000 tourists visit Chilika every year for dolphin Watching. October–January and May–June are the peak season for tourists at Chilika, with a maximum 600-700 per day during December–January. The Dolphin Motorboat Association has 75 8-passenger motorboats for dolphin watching. Tourists pay Rs. 250 for 60–90 minutes per trip. According to the Association, most tourists see dolphins. Only 5% return disappointed. Besides the Association, the Odisha Tourism Department organises "dolphin-watch" for tourists. Even during monsoon, about 100 tourists/day visit the lake.
 Boat based dolphin watching tours impact dolphin behavior and cause several accidental dolphin deaths each year. CDA conducts an annual census of dolphin deaths. They report 15 deaths in 2003-04, 11 in 2004-05, 8 in 2005-06 and 5 in 2006-07. 40% of the 2006-07 deaths were by mechanised boats.
 Since 2004, the Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society has been conducting a science based community education project to conserve the Irrawaddy dolphins and Chilika Lake. They have determined the primary cause of mortality for this population of dolphins is floating gill nets and hook line fisheries and the secondary cause is boat strikes from increasing unmanaged tourism activities.
 The Irrawaddy dolphins have a seemingly mutualistic relationship of co-operative fishing with the traditional fishermen. Fishermen recall when they would call out to the dolphins, to drive fish into their nets. Castnet fishing with the help of Irrawaddy dolphins in upper reaches of the Ayeyawady River has been well documented.
 Nalaban Island: The 15 km2 Nalaban Island is within the Lagoon and is the core area of the Ramsar designated wetlands. It was declared a bird sanctuary under the Wildlife Protection Act in 1973. It’s the heart of the park where one can seen thousands of birds descending during the migratory season. The island disappears during monsoon season due to inundation, and post-monsoon, the island emerges again.
 The vast lake harbours 225 species of fish, a wide variety of phytoplankton, algae and aquatic plants, and also supports over 350 species of non-aquatic plants. The other areas where high concentrations of birds are recorded are Gerasara, Parikud Island, and the western shores of the Northern sector.
 Chilka Lake is one of the best bird watching spots in India, and is also popular for fishing and angling.
 Puri: This holy city is famous for the late 11th century built Jagannath temple. The other major attraction here is the beach, from where you can witness the glorious sunrise and equally mesmerising sunset. It’s said that a visit to Puri is incomplete without visiting Chilika Lagoon.
 The Nirmaljhara Waterfall: This is an ideal place for pitching your picnic tent. The beautiful waterfall is located nearly 12 km from Chilika Lagoon.
 Satpada: This place is located at a distance of around 55 kimi from Puri, on the eastern side of the Chilika Lake. This place is surrounded by lagoons from the three sides, which makes this place an amazing tourist spot for nature lover.
 The open air and scenic natural flora and fauna of the lake are an attraction for eco-tourism. This is expected to provide a degree of alternate employment to the local community and generate environmental awareness, among local residents as well as visitors, about the conservation and wise use of the lake’s natural resources. The locations within the lake identified for such activity are:
 The lake is well connected by road to Chennai and Kolkata through National Highway No 5. Satpara town on the eastern bank of the lake is about 50 kimi by road southwest of the city of Puri and at a distance of 100 kimi from Bhubaneswar, the capital of Odisha, which is also the nearest airport.
 A broad gauge railway line of the South Eastern Railway from Kolkata skirts along the western bank of the lake passing through Balugaon, Chilika and Rambha stations.
 Within the lake precincts, Odisha Tourism Development Corporation Ltd and the Revenue Department of the state government offer boat cruises. Private operators also provide country boats on hire to various islands in the lake.
 There are OTDC Guest houses at Barkul, Rambha, Satapada & several hotels at Balugaon. Before entering into the Nalbana Bird Sanctuary one has to obtain an entry permit. The entry permit has to be produced at entry/exit points, at check gates as and whenever requested by officials.
 
 karanj - phulon kaa chitrankan.
 sanderling calidris alba
 terek sandpyper xenus sinerius
 cantish plower 
 kaali poonch vaala gudwit limosa
 chitkabara kathphodva
 baaj
 safed pet vaali samudri chil
 haraa samudri kachua
 dugong
 angahin chhipakali
 machhlee pakadaney vaali billi
  vikiatra par Chilka_Lake ke liye yatra guide
