 bharat main islam 
 itihaas
 mughal · bhartiya islamic
 moinuddin chishti · akbamhamad raja khan · moulana ajadasar saiyad ahamed khan · bahadur yaar jang
 uttareey · mappilaaj · tamilkonkani · marathi · vora patelmemon · purvottar · kashmirihyderaabadi · daudi bohara · khojoudia · navayat · beari · meo · sunni boharakaayamkhani · bengali · andhra muslim 
 barelvi · deobandi · shiya
 hyderabad kii muslim samskruti
 dakshin asia main ahale sunnat andolanbhartiya muslim rashtravadabhartiya itihaas ke muslim vrittant
 mughal vaastukala, jo ki bhartiya, islamic evam farsi vaastukala kaa mishran he, ek vishesh style, jo ki mughal bharat main 16veen 17veen evam 18veen sadi main laae|mughal vaastukala kaa charam tajmahal he.
 mughal vansh aarambh hua badshaah babar se 1526 main. babar ne panipat main ek masjid banavaai, ibrahim lodhi par apni vijay ke smarak rup main. ek duusari masjid, jise babari masjid kehete hai<
 kuch praathmik evam ati vishisht lakshanik udhaaharan, jo ki aarmabhik mughal vaastu kala ke shesh hai, ke samraat shershah suri ke chote shashan kaal ke hai; jo ki mughal nahin tha. inamen ek masjid, kila e kunha dilli ke paas, laal kila kaa samrik vaastu dilli main, evam rohtas kila, jhelum ke kinare, aaj ke pakistan main. uskaa makbara, jo ki ashtakoniya he, ek sarovar ke bich aadhaar par bana he, sasaram main he, jise uske putr evam uttaradhikari islam shah suri . dwaara banwaaya gaya.
 badshaah akbar ne bahut nirmaan karavaaya, evam uske kaal main is style ne khub vikaas kiya. gujarat evam anya shaileyon main, mislim evam hindu lakshan, uske nirmaan main dikhaai dete hai. akbar ne fatehpur sikri kaa shahi nagar 1500 main basaaya, jo ki agra se 26 mile pashchim main he. fatehpur sikri kaa atyadhik nirmaan, uski kaary style ko sarvaadhik darshata he. vahaan kii vrahat masjid, uski kaary style ko sarvottam darshaati he, jiskaa ki koi doosraa jod milanaa mushkil he. yahan kaa dakshin dwaar, ati prasiddh he, evam iskaa koi jod puure bharat main nahin he. yah vishwa kaa sarvaadhik unchaa dwaar he, jise buland darwaja kehete hai. mughalon ne prabhaachashali makbare banawaye, jinamein akbar ke pita humayun kaa makbara, dilli main, evam akbar kaa makbara, sikandra, agra ke paas sthit he. yah donon hi apane aap main bejod hai.
 Under Jahangir the Hindu features vanished from the style; his great mosque at Lahore is in the Persian style, covered with enamelled tiles. At Agra, the tomb of Itmad-ud-Daula completed in 1628, built entirely of white marble and covered wholly by pietra dura mosaic, is one of the most splendid examples of that class of ornamentation anywhere to be found. Jahangir also built the Shalimar Gardens and its accompanying pavilions on the shore of Dal Lake in Kashmir. He also built a monument to his pet antelope, Hiran Minar in Sheikhupura, Pakistan and due to his great love for
 the agrawal is the best in bharatpur it is made in tajmahal and originality of the style gave way under Shah Jahan to a delicate elegance and refinement of detail, illustrated in the magnificent palaces erected in his reign at Agra and Delhi, the latter one the most exquisitely beautiful in India. The most splendid of the Mogul tombs, and the most renowned building in India, is the Taj Mahal at Agra, the tomb of Mumtaz Mahal, the wife of Shah Jahan.The Moti Masjid in the Agra Fortand The Jama Masjid at Delhi are an imposing building, and their position and architecture have been carefully considered so as to produce a pleasing effect and feeling of spacious elegance and well-balanced proportion of parts. In his works Shah Jahan presents himself as the most magnificent builder of Indian sovereigns. He also built the mausoleum and sections of the huge Lahore Fort that include the impressive Moti Masjid, Sheesh Mahal, and Naulakha pavilion which are all enclosed in the fort. He also built a mosque after himself in Thatta called Shahjahan Mosque. Another mosque was built during his tenture in Lahore called Wazir Khan Mosque, by Shaikh Ilm-ud-din Ansari who was the court physician to the emperor.
 The Taj Mahal, the "teardrop on eternity", was completed in 1648 by the emperor Shah Jahan in memory of his wife Mumtaz Mahal who died while giving birth to their 14th child. The extensive use of precious and semiprecious stones as inlay and the vast quantity of white marble required nearly bankrupted the empire. The Taj Mahal is completely symmetric other than the sarcophagus of Shah Jahan, which is placed off center in the crypt room below the main floor. This symmetry extended to the building of an entire mirror mosque in red sandstone, to complement the Mecca-facing mosque place to the west of the main structure.hi
 The Taj Mahal in Agra, India and the Shalimar Garden in Lahore, Pakistan, are two sites which are on the world heritage list of UNESCO. One can see the architectural similarities and the love for water that the Mughals expressed in many of their buildings.
 The Taj is considered to be one of the most beautiful monuments of love and is one of the Seven Wonders of the World, when it comes to tourism.
 In Aurangzeb's reign squared stone and marble gave way to brick or rubble with stucco ornament. Srirangapatna and Lucknow have examples of later Indo-Muslim architecture. He also added his mark to the Lahore Fort and built one the largest mosques in the city, called Badshahi Mosque. He also built one of the thirteen gates, and it was later named after him, Alamgir. 
