 myanmar lipi yaa burmi lipi, burmi bhashaa likhane ke liye prayukt hoti he. yah brahmi parivaar kii lipi he. iske akshar gol hote hai jo taadptr par lekhan main suvidha pradaan karte the kyonki sidhi rekhaayen likhane se patton ke fatne kaa dar rahata he.
 burmi lipi, brahmi lipi se vyutpann he kintu kuch-kuch shabdon kii vartanee or uccharan main bahut antar hota he. udhaaharan ke liye,
 yahan   kaa arth vaastavik visarg nahin he balki iske lagane kaa arth sangat maatra ko bada karnaa he.
 There are several diactric marks that alter the vowel sound of a letter. Two diacritics are used exclusively for Pali and are rarely seen elsewhere.
 One or more of these accents can be added to a consonant to change its sound. In addition, other modifying symbols are used to differentiate tone and sound, but are not considered diacritics.
 burmi lipi ke romaneekaran kii chaar pranaliyaan prachlit hai. iname se do pranaliyaan lipyantaran kahi ja sakati hai tathaa anya do kaa jor uccharan par he isaliye unhen taanscripshan kah sakate hai.
 lipyantaran kii pranaliyaan hai- MLC Transcription System tathaa ALA-LC Romanization bhi dekhen. taanscripshan pranaliyaan hai- BGN/PCGN romanization tathaa John Okell dwaara prayukt pranali.
 in pranaaliyon kaa vistrut vivechan neeche kii saraniyon main diya gaya he-
 Syllable onsets kaa romaneekaran nimnavat kiya jaataa he-
 Syllable rhymes kaa romaneekaran nimnavat kiya jaataa he. is sarini main burmi varna 'k' က saanchaa:IPAchar ko aadhaar ke rup main prayog kiya gaya he. 
 In sequences with ွ or ဝ before တ်, န်, ပ်, မ် or together with ံ, the vowel pronounced is saanchaa:IPAchar rather than the expected saanchaa:IPAchar. This is reflected in the BGN/PCGN and Okell transcriptions, but not in the MLCTS and ALA-LC transliterations.
 The independent vowel letters are transcribed the same as the vowels formed with အ, except in ALA-LC, where those formed with အ take a preposed apostrophe :
 The low tone and checked tone are represented as shown in the table above. The representation of the high tone and creaky tone varies depending on the respective syllable rhyme: sometimes they are inherent in the vowel symbol used, and sometimes they are indicated by a diacritic mark. The ALA-LC romanization indicates these two tones explicitly only in cases where diacritic marks are used; the other three romanizations indicate them regardless of how they are spelled. Examples:
 Minor syllables in Burmese contain only the vowel saanchaa:IPAchar in the rhyme and do not bear tone. They are always followed by a major syllable . In the orthography, they are most commonly spelled as if their rhyme was saanchaa:IPAchar, but are often spelled in other ways. In the MLCTS and ALA-LC systems, minor syllables are romanized exactly as they are spelled in Burmese orthography. In the modified BGN/PCGN system and in the Okell system, minor syllables are indicated by the letter ă regardless of the Burmese orthography. Examples:
 Where two consonants appear next to each other between two vowels in a romanization, use hyphens as necessary to avoid ambiguity. For example :
 In many words, a written voiceless consonant is pronounced voiced when it appears after a vowel or saanchaa:IPAchar. This is indicated in the BGN-PCGN and Okell transcriptions, but not in the MLCTS and ALA-LC transliterations. In BGN-PCGN, the letter for the voiced consonant is used; in Okell, the letter for the voiceless consonant is used but underlined. Examples:
