 mahaar regiment bhartiya sena kaa ek infantry regiment he. yadhyapi multah ise maharashtra ke mahaar sainikon ko milakar banane kaa vichaar tha, kintu keval yahi bhartiya sena kaa ekmaatr regiment he jise bharat ke sabhi samudaayon or kshetron ke sainikon ko milakar banaaya gaya he.
 mahaar scouts or unki sena kile main sainikon ke rup main maratha raja shivaji dwaara bhartee kiye gaye the. unka ek bada hissaa banane company ke bombay sena ke chathe hisse main east india company company dwaara bhartee kiye gaye the. bombay sena unki bahaduree or dhvaj ke prati vafadari ke liye mahaar sainikon isht or isliye bhi kyonki ve angl-maratha yuddh ke dauraan par bharosa kiya ja saktaa he. ve kai safaltaaon hasil kii he, koregaanv kii ladaai, jahaan mahaar bahul company sainikon ko ek bahut bada peshwa bajirao dwitiya ke netritv main parajeet main bhi shaamil he. yah ladaai ek obilisk, koregaanv stambh he, jo bhartiya swatantraaa jab tak mahaar regiment ke shikhar par chapa rup main janaa dwaara manaaya gaya. bombay sena kii mahaar sainikon ne 1857 ke bhartiya vidroh] main karrwai ko dekha, or do regimenton main shaamil ho gaye is regiment ke british yuddh tahat vidroh "bolo hindustan kii jai" he.
 
 vidroh ke baad bhartiya sena ke british adhikariyon, vishesh rup se jo pratham or dwitiya afgaan yuddh main seva kii thi, marshall daud siddhant ke liye mudra dene ke liye shuru kiya. yah siddhant tha ki kuch bhartiya jatiyon or samudaayon ke bich swaabhaavik rup se jangi, or adhik dusron kii tulana main yuddh ke liye anukool the. is siddhant kaa ek pramukh prastaavak lard roberts, jo november 1885 main commander-in-chif ke bhartiya sena ke ban rahe anya samudaayon kii haani ke liye dhire-dhire bhartiya sena ke 'Punjabisation "tha. mahaar sainikon ke liye antim jhatka, 1892 main aayaa jab yah "varg regimenton" santhaan ko bhartiya sena main nirnay liya gaya. maharon in varg regimenton main shaamil nahin the, or yah adhishuchet kiya gaya tha ki maharon, kuch anya virgon ke saath ke bich, ab bhartiya sena main bhartee ho gaye the. mahaar sainikon, jo 104 vysarai kamishan adhikari or gaiyr kamishan adhikariyon or sipaahiyon ke ek mejabaan shaamil demobilized the. is ghatana ko ek sarkari ve ek sau se adhik varshon ke liye kaam kiya tha dwaara apni vafadari kii ek vishwasghaat ke rup main maharon ne mana gaya tha.
 After the demobilisation of the Mahar troops, there were many attempts by the leaders of the Mahar community to persuade the Government to let them serve in the Army once again. Petitions to this effect were drafted by ex-soldiers such as Gopal Baba Walangkar in 1894, and Shivram Janba Kamble in 1904. These petitions were supported in principle by the politician and social reformer Gopal Krishna Gokhale, who was opposed to the Martial Races theory. They were also supported by the Indian National Congress, who were also opposed to the recruiting policies of the Army.
 The recruitment policies of the British Indian Army continued until the beginning of the First World War in 1914. The War forced the Government to begin more broad-based recruiting, and the Mahars were at last allowed to enlist in the Army. One battalion of Mahar troops, the 111th Mahars was raised in the June 1917. However, the battalion did not see much service during the War, and in 1920 it was merged with the 71st Punjabis. Finally, the battalion was disbanded in March 1921, and the Mahars were once again demobilised.
 The period between the wars saw increased efforts by the Mahars to persuade the government to let them enlist in the Army. One proponent of Mahar recruitment was Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, whose father, Sub. Maj. Ramji Maloji Sakpal had been a soldier in the British Indian Army. However, the proposed reorganisation of the Indian Army that was to occur in the 1930s was postponed because of a lack of funds in the Great Depression. In 1939, the Second World War broke out, and once again, the Army was forced to overlook its narrow minded recruitment policies in the face of harsh necessity.
 In the July 1941, B. R. Ambedkar was appointed to the Defence Advisory Committee of the Viceroy's Executive Council. He used this appointment to exert pressure within the military establishment for a Mahar regiment. He also appealed to the Mahars to join the Army in large numbers. In October, the Army gave in, and the 1st Battalion of the Mahar Regiment was raised in Belgaum under Lt. Col. HJR Jackson of the 13th Frontier Force Rifles and Sub. Maj. Sheikh Hassnuddin. The 2nd Battalion was raised in Kamptee in June 1942 under Lt. Col. JWK Kirwan and Sub. Maj. Bholaji Ranjane. A cap badge was designed for the Regiment by Capt. EEL Mortlemans, an officer of 2nd Mahar. The badge featured the Koregaon Pillar over the word "MAHAR". The third battalion, the 25th Mahars, was raised in Belgaum in the August 1942 by Lt. Col V. Chambier and Sub. Maj. Sardar Bahadur Ladkojirao Bhonsale, and the 3rd Mahars were raised in Nowshera by Lt. Col. RND Frier and Sub. Maj. Bholaji Ranjane. During the War, the 1st and 3rd Mahars served in the North-West Frontier Province, while the 2nd and 25th Battalions were employed on internal security duties within the country. The 2nd Battalion also saw service in the Burma Campaign as a part of the 23rd Indian Division, where they suffered 5 casualties and had one officer Mentioned in dispatches. They also served in Iraq after the War as a part of PAIFORCE. In 1946, the 25th Mahars were disbanded, along with many other garrison battalions of the Indian Army. Its officers and men were largely absorbed by the other three battalions of the Regiment. In the October 1946, the Regiment was converted into a Machine Gun Regiment, and the Regimental Centre was established at Kamptee. Following conversion of the Regiment to a machine-gun regiment, the cap-badge was changed. The new badge had two crossed Vickers machine guns over the Koregaon Pillar, over a scroll that said "The Mahar MG Regiment". The three surviving battalions of the regiment served as a part of the Punjab Boundary Force, and took part in escorting refugees during the Partition of India.
 The Border Scouts were an irregular force formed by the people of the border villages in East Punjab during Partition. Hailing as they did from the erstwhile greater state of East Punjab, the force had people hailing from a greater mix of ethnic, religious and caste backgrounds than was the norm in the Indian Army. They did some useful work defending villages from attacks during partition, and as a reward, were given a more permanent character as the East Punjab Frontier Scouts in 1948. They served along the border with Pakistan as border guards, and were regarded as a useful adjunct of the Punjab Armed Police. The unit was redesignated the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Battalions of the Border Scouts in 1951, with recruitment from different North Indian communities. In 1956, the decision to convert this force into Machine-Gun Regiments was taken, and the three battalions were merged with the Mahar Regiment, the only Indian Machine Gun Regiment in existence at the time. They joined the Regiment as the 4th, 5th and 6th Battalions of the Mahar Regiment, and it is to these units that the Regiment traces its mixed-class composition. The three Battalions style themselves battalions of the Mahar Regiment even today.
 The class composition of the Regiment also changed. While 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 7th, 8th and 13th battalions were all pure Mahar battalions, the others were mixed classes right down to the smallest sub-unit level. The conversion training started in November 1963 with 1st Mahar and completed in May 1964 with 10th Mahar. The year 1965 saw all the battalions of the regiment gearing up for operations. These included the newly raised 11th and 12th battalions that had the unique composition of Bengalis, Oriyas and Gujratis - the communities that had been stamped as non-martial by the British. Their entry into the Mahar fraternity added strength to national integration-the distinctive feature which the regiment has always been proud of.
 Battalions
 saanchaa:Indian Army Infantry RegimentssAzcA:Https://youtu.be/cmXjoLPc0lg
 
 brigade of guards • da parachute regiment • mekanaijad infentry regiment • punjab regiment • madras regiment • bambai grenadiers • maratha lite infentry • raajapootaana rifles • rajput regiment • sikh regiment • sikh lite infentry • dogra regiment • gadhwal regiment• kumaun regiment • assam regiment • bihar regiment • meher regiment • jammu kashmir rifles • jammu kashmir lite infentry • jat regiment • naga regiment • 1 gurkha rifles • 3 gurkha rifles • 4 gurkha rifles • 5 gurkha rifles • 8 gurkha rifles• 9 gurkha rifles • 11 gurkha rifles • ladakh scout • sikkim scouts
