 kalakaaron ke naam kii kendriya suchi vartmaan main lagbhag 293,000 naam or kalakaaron ke bare main anya jaankaree se yukt ek online database kaa upyog kar karne vaali niyantrit shabdaawalee he. isamen kalakaaron ke naam, chhadmanaam, sanskaran, vartanee, kai bhashaaon main naam, or parivartit naam aadi shaamil ho sakate hai. haalanki yah ek suchi ke rup main pradarshit kiya jaataa he, jo ek kosh, kosh nirmaan ke liye iesao or iesao maanakon ke anuroop sanrachit he. yah shreneebaddh or saahchary sambandh par aadhaarit hota he. 
 yah suchi puri tarah se kalakaaron ke vyaktigat vivaran par aadhaarit or kendrit hota hoti he. vartmaan main isamen lagbhag 120,000 kalakaar shaamil hai. database main, prayek kalakaar ke ricard kaa ek anoothaa sankhyatmak idi ke aadhaar par pahchaan kii gayi he . prayek kalakaar kaa record ankit karne ke liye linkd naam, sambandhit kalakaaron kaa vivaran, data ke liye sutron se jaankaree, or note aadi kaa prayog hota hai. isamen asthaayee kawarej pesh karne ke liye prachinkaal se paddatiyon ke saath-saath apadated pranaaliyon kaa istemaal hota he jo vaishvik hota he.
 yah suchi uchit naam or kalakaaron ke bare main sambandhit jaankaree uplabdh karaati he. isamen kalakaaron yaa to vyaktiyon yaa vyaktiyon ke samoohon ke saath milakar kaam kiya ja saktaa he. is suchi main aam taur par garbhaadhan yaa drishy kala or sthapaty kala ke utpaadan main shaamil rachanakaaron kaa pratinidhitiv hota hai. kuch pradarshnkaree kalakaaron ko bhi shaamil kiya jaataa hai lekin aam taur par nahin.
 Work on the ULAN began in 1984, when the Getty decided to merge and coordinate controlled vocabulary resources for use by the J. Paul Getty Trust's many automated documentation projects. The Art and Architecture Thesaurus was already being managed by the Getty at this time, and the Getty attempted to respond to requests from Getty projects for additional controlled vocabularies for artists' names and geographic names . In 1987 the Getty created a department dedicated to compiling and distributing terminology. The ULAN grows and changes via contributions from the user community and editorial work of the Getty Vocabulary Program.
 Although originally intended only for use by Getty projects, the broader art information community outside the Getty expressed a need to use ULAN for cataloging and retrieval. The Getty thus distributed ULAN for broader use according to the tenets previously established for the construction and maintenance of the Art and Architecture Thesaurus: Its scope includes names needed to catalog and retrieve information about the visual arts and architecture; it is based on terminology that is current, warranted for use by authoritative literary sources, and validated by use in the scholarly art and architectural history community; and it is compiled and edited in response to the needs of the user community. Originally constructed as a simple alphabetized "union list" of clustered artist names and biographies, in order to make it consistent with the AAT and Getty Thesaurus of Geographic Names, in the late 1990s ULAN was brought into compliance with national and international standards for thesaurus construction. Its scope was broadened to include corporate bodies such as architectural firms and repositories of art, which may have hierarchical levels.
 The ULAN was founded under the management of Eleanor Fink . The ULAN has been constructed over the years by numerous members of the user community and an army of dedicated editors, under the supervision of several managers. The ULAN was published in 1994 in hardcopy and machine-readable files. Given the growing size and frequency of changes and additions to the ULAN, by 1997 it had become evident that hard-copy publication was impractical. It is now published in automated formats only, in both a searchable online Web interface and in data files available for licensing. The data for ULAN is compiled and edited in an editorial system that was custom-built by Getty technical staff to meet the unique requirements of compiling data from many contributors, merging, moving, and publishing in various formats. Final editorial control of the ULAN is maintained by the Getty Vocabulary Program, using well-established editorial rules. The current managers of the ULAN are Patricia Harpring, Managing Editor, and Murtha Baca, Head, Vocabulary Program and Digital Resource Management.
 The ULAN is a structured vocabulary containing around 120,000 records, including 293,000 names and biographical and bibliographic information about artists and architects, including a wealth of variant names, pseudonyms, and language variants.
 Even though the structure is relatively flat, the ULAN is constructed as a hierarchical database; its trees branch from a root called Top of the ULAN hierarchies ; it currently has two published facets: Person and Corporate Body. Entities in the Person facet typically have no children. Entities in the Corporate Body facet may branch into trees. There may be multiple broader contexts, making the ULAN structure polyhierarchical. In addition to the hierarchical relationships, the ULAN also has equivalent and associative relationships.
 2.12313322b xc,bchj1540vxsm xv x56236
 .236qk8sd9 3
