 ₳ ​฿ ​₵ ​¢ ​₡ ​₢ ​$ ​₫ ​₯ ​֏ ​₠ ​€ ​ƒ ​₣ ​₲ ​₴ ​₭ ​₺ ​₾ ​ℳ ​₥ ​₦ ​₧ ​₱ ​₰ ​£ ​៛ ​₽ ​₹ ₨ ​₪ ​৳ ​₸ ​₮ ​₩ ​¥
 aadhaar ank ek pratishat ke saunven hisse ko kaha jaataa he. ise sankshep main beepi, beep yaa bip tathaa sankshipt bahuvachan ko bips se pradarshit/sambodhit kiya jaataa he. kabhi kabhaar ise angreji main parmyriad bhi kah diya jaataa he jiskaa shabdic arth hi he prati das hazaar.
 lekin in donon ko shabdon kaa prayog ek samaan nahin he or parmyriad sambhawatah pareshaani khadi kar saktaa he. udhaaharan ke liye 10 aadhaar ankon main yadi ek badhaayaa jaae to saamanytah samajha jaataa he ki parinaam 11 aadhaar ank hoga; lekin yadi If used interchangeably, the permyriad is potentially confusing because an increase of one basis point to a 10 basis point value is generally understood to mean an increase to 11 basis points; not an increase of one part in ten thousand, meaning an increase to 10.001 basis points.
 parmyriad ko ‱ chihn se pradarshit kiya jaataa he, jo ki dikhne main "pratishat" ke chihn ke hi samaan he kintu ant main do shunya ke chihn adhik hai.
 ek aadhaar ank kii paribhaasha is prakaar he:
 aadhaar ank kaa upyog adhiktar ese sandarbh main suvidhajanak tareeke se kiya jaataa he jahaan ek pratishat se kam ke interval par vichaar kiya janaa ho. iskaa ek pramukh udhaaharan vittiya bazaaron main byaaj daren hai jinamein utaar chadhaav aamtaur par ek pratishat se kam ho sakate hai. ese main aadhaar ankon main baat karnaa adhik suvidhajanak hota he. yani, 0.10% ke antar ko 10 aadhaar ankon kaa parivartan kaha jayega. udhaaharan ke liye yah vyaktavy dekhen- repo dar main 25 aadhaar ankon kii badhotaree karte hue ise 7.5 pratishat se 7.75 pratishat kiya. duusare shabdon main kaha jaae to 100 aadhaar ankon kaa arth hoga ek pratishat.
 Like percentage points, basis points avoid the ambiguity between relative and absolute discussions about interest rates by dealing only with the absolute change in numeric value of a rate. For example, if a report says there has been a "1% increase" from a 10% interest rate, this could refer to an increase either from 10% to 10.1%, or from 10% to 11% . If, however, the report says there has been a "100 basis point increase" from a 10% interest rate, then we know that the interest rate of 10% has increased by 1.00% to an 11% rate.
 It is common practice in the financial industry to use basis points to denote a rate change in a financial instrument, or the difference between two interest rates, including the yields of fixed-income securities.
 Since certain loans and bonds may commonly be quoted in relation to some index or underlying security, they will often be quoted as a spread over the index. For example, a loan that bears interest of 0.50% per annum above the London Interbank Offered Rate is said to be 50 basis points over LIBOR, which is commonly expressed as "L+50bps" or simply "L+50".
 The term "basis point" has its origins in trading the "basis" or the spread between two interest rates. Since the basis is usually small, these are quoted multiplied up by 10000, and hence a "full point" movement in the "basis" is a basis point. Contrast with pips in FX forward markets.
 The relationship between percentage changes and basis points can be summarized as follows: 1 percentage point change = 100 basis points, and 0.01 percentage points = 1 basis point.
 So, a bond whose yield increases from 5% to 5.5% is said to increase by 50 basis points; or interest rates that have risen 1 percentage point are said to have increased by 100 basis points.
