 
 laal bahadur shastrijan. je.en. choudharylefti. jan. joginder dhillolafti. jan. harbaksh singhlefti. jan. kashmir singh katochalafti. jan. pi o daneem arjan singhediem bhaskar soman
 bhartiya daawa
 pakistani daawa
 pakistani daawa'
 bhartiya daawa
 
 1965 kaa bharat-paak yuddh un muthbhedon kaa naam he jo donon deshon ke bich april 1965 se sitambar 1965 ke bich hui thi. ise kashmir ke duusare yuddh ke naam se bhi janaa jaataa he. bharat or pakistan ke bich jammu or kashmir rajya par adhikaar ke liye bantwaare ke samay se hi vivaad chal rahaa he. 1947 main bharat-pakistan ke bich pratham yuddh bhi kashmir ke liye hi hua tha.is ladaai kii shuruuaat pakistan ne apane sainikon ko ghuspaithiyon ke rup main bhej kar is ummid main kii thi ki kashmir kii janata bharat ke khilaaf vidroh kar degi. is abhiyaan kaa naam pakistan ne yudhbhiyaan jibraltar rakhaa tha. paanch maheene tak chalane vaale is yuddh main donon pakshon ke hajaaron log maare gayi. is yuddh kaa ant sanyukt raashtra ke dwaara yuddh viraam kii ghoshnaa ke saath hua or taashkand main donon pakshon main samjhauta hua.
 is ladaai kaa adhikansh hissaa donon pakshon kii thal sena ne ladaa. kargil yuddh ke pehle kashmir ke vishay main kabhi itnaa bada sainik jamaavada nahin hua tha. yuddh main paidal or bakhtarband tukadiyon ne vayusena kii madad se anek abhiyaanon main hissaa liya. dono paksho ke bich hue anek yudhon kii tarah is yuddh kii anek jaankariyaan donon pakshon ne saarvajanik nahin kii.
 bharat or pakistan ke 1947 main hue batwaare ke samay se hi bharat or pakistan ke bich kai muddo par tanatani chal rahi thi haalanki jammu or kashmir kaa mudda isame sabase bada tha par anya seemaa vivaad bhi the iname sabase pramukh kuccha kaa ran, jo ki ek banjar ilaaka he, ke batwaare par tha. 20 march 1965 main pakistan ke dwaara jaanboojh kar kuccha ke ran main jhadpen shuru kar di gayi. shuru main iname keval seemaa suraksha bal hi shaamil the par baad main dono deshon kii sena bhi yuddh main shaamil ho gayi 1 june 1965 main british pradhanmantri herold wilson ne dono paksho ke bich ladaai rukvaa kar is vivaad ko hal karne ke liye ek nishpaksh madhyasth nyaayalay kii sthapana kar di. is nyaayalay ne kuccha ke ran kii kareeb 900 varg kilometre jagah pakistan ko de di. haalanki pakistan kaa daawa 3500 varg kilometre par tha. .
 kuccha ke ran main mili safalataa se utsahit pakistan ke rajanetaaon khaskar tatkaaleen videshmantri zulfikar ali bhutto ne rashtrpati or senadhyaksh general ayub khan par dabaav daalaa ki ve kashmir par hamale kaa aadesh de. bharat us samay china se yuddh haar chukaa tha or unka maananaa tha ki bharat us samay yuddh karne kii sthiti main nahin tha. iske alaava bhutto or unke vichaar se sahamat anya generalo yahya khan or tikka khan kaa yah bhi maananaa tha ki kashmir kii janata bharat se aaazaad hokar pakistan se vilay kii icchhuk he or sainiko ko ghuspaithiyon ke vesh main bhejne par unke samarthan main vidroh kar degi. aakhir general ayub khan dabaav main aa gayi or unhone gupt sainik abhiyaan oparation jibraltar kaa aadesh de diya. is abhiyaan kaa mukhya uddeshy kashmir kii janata main vidroh bhadakaana or bhartiya sanchartantr evam parivahan vyavastha ko nuksaan pahuchana tha. pakistan ke ghuspaithiyon ko jaldi hi pahchaan liya gaya or vidroh karne ke bajaay janata ne unki soochna bhartiya sainikon ko de di or yah abhiyaan purnatah vifal ho gaya.
 5 agast 1965 ko 26000 se 30000 ke bich pakistani sainikon ne kashmir kii sthaneey aabaadi kii veshbhusha main niyantran rekha ko paar kar bhartiya kashmir main pravesh kar liya. bhartiya sena ne sthaneey aabaadi se isaki soochna paakar 15 agast ko niyantran rekha ko paar kiya..
 shuruyaat main bhartiya sena ko acchhee safalataa mili. usne topakhane kii madad se teen mahatvapurn pahari thikaano par kabja jamaa liya. pakistan ne tithwal, uri or poonch kshetron main mahatvapurn badhat kar lee par 18 agast ko pakistani abhiyaan kii takat main kaaphi kami aa gayi thi. bhartiya atirikt tukadiya laane main safal ho gayi or bharat ne pakistan ke kabje vaale kashmir main 8 kilometre andar ghus kar haji pir darre par kabja kar liya. is kabje se pakistan sakate main aa gaya. abhiyaan jibraltar ke ghuspaithiye sanikon kaa rasta bharatiyon ke kabje main aa gaya tha or abhiyaan vifal ho gaya. yahi nahin, pakistan kii kaman ko lagane laga ki pakistani kashmir kaa mahatvapurn shahar mujaffarabad ab bharatiyo ke kabje main jane hi vaala he. mujaffarabad par dabaav kam karne ke liye pakistan ne ek nayaa abhiyaan oparation grand slam shuru kiya.
 1 sitambar 1965 ko pakistan ne grand slam naamak ek abhiyaan ke tahat samrik drushti se mahatvapurn shahar akhnur jammu or kashmiripar kabje ke liye akraman kar diya. is abhiyaan kaa uddeshy kashmir ghati kaa shesh bharat se sampark tod tha taaki uski rasad or sanchaar vayvastha bhang kar di jaay. pakistan ke is akraman ke liye bharat taiyaar nahin tha or pakistan ko baari sankhya main sainiko or behatar kism ke tanko kaa laabh mil rahaa tha. shuruwat main bharat ko baari kshati uthaani padi is par bhartiya sena ne hawaii hamale kaa upyog kiya iske jawaab main pakistan ne punjab or srinagar ke hawaii thikaano par hamalaa kar diya. yuddh ke is charan main pakistan atyadhik behatar sthiti main tha or is apratyaashit hamale se bhartiya kheme main ghabrahat fail gayi thi. akhnur ke pakistani sena ke haath main jane se bharat ke liye kashmir ghati mehar kaa khatra paidaa ho saktaa tha. grand slam ke vifal hone kii do vajahe thi sabase pehali or badi vajah yah thi ki pakistan kii sainik kaman ne jeet ke muhane main par apane sainik commander ko badal diya aise main pakistani sena ko aage badhane main ek din kii deree ho gayi or un 24 ghanto main bharat ko akhnur kii raksha ke liye atirikt sainik or saamaan laane kaa mauka mil gaya khud bharartiya sena ke sthaneey commander bhuchakke the ki pakistan itani aasaan jeet kyon chhod rahaa he. ek din kii deree ke baavjood bharat ke pashchimi kaman ke sena pramukh yah jaanate the ki pakistan bahut behatar sthiti main he or usko rokane ke liye unhone yah prastaav tatkaaleen senadhyaksh general choudhary ko diya ki punjab seemaa main ek nayaa morcha khol kar lahore par hamalaa kar diya jaay. general choudhary is baat se sahamat nahin the lekin tatkaaleen pradhanmantri laal bahadur shashtri ne unki baat ansuni kar is hamale kaa aadesh de diya.
 bharat ne 6 sitambar ko antarrashtriya seemaa rekha ko paar kar pashchimi morche par hamalaa kar yuddh kii aadhikarik shuruwat kar di. 6 sitambar ko bharat kii 15ve paidal sainya ikai ne dwitiya vishwa yuddh ke anbhavi major general prasad ke netratv main icchhogil nahar ke pashchimi kinare main pakistan ke bade hamale kaa saamana kiya. icchhogil nahar bharat or pakistan kii vaastavik seemaa thi. is hamale main khud major general prasad ke kafile par bhi hamalaa hua or unhe apana vaahan chhod kar bhaagna padaa. bharat ne pratinkraman main barki gaanv ke sameep nahar ko paar karne main safalataa arjeet kar lee. isse bhartiya sena lahore ke hawaii adde par hamalaa karne kii seemaa main pahuch gayi iske parinamswaroop america ne apane nagarikon ko lahore se nikaalane ke liye kuch samay ke liye yudhviram kii apil kii. isi bich pakistan ne lahore par dabaav ko kam karne ke liye khemkaran par hamalaa kar us par kabja kar liya badale main bharat ne bediyaan or uske aas paas ke gaavon par hamalaa kar diya.
 6 sitambar ko lahore par hamale main bhartiya sena ke pratham paidal sainya khand ke saath dwitiya bakhtarband upkhand ke teen tanks daste shaamil the. ve turant hi seemaa paar karke icchhogil nahar pahuch gayi pakistani sena ne puliyaaon par raksha daste tainaat kar diye jin pulo ko bachaaya nahin ja saktaa tha unako uda diya gaya pakistan ke is kadam se bhartiya sena kaa aage badhnaa ruk gaya. jat regiment kii ek ikai 3 jat ne nahar paar karke dograi or batapore par kabja kar liya. usee din pakistani sena ne bakhtarband ikai or vayusena kii madad se bhartiya sena kii 15ve khand par bada pratiakraman kiya haalaaki isse 3 jat ko maamuli nuksaan hi hua lekin 15ve khand ko peeche hatana padaa or uske rasad or hathiyaaro ke vahno ko kaaphi kshati pahuchi. bhartiya sena ke bade adhikario ko jamini halaat kii sahi jaankaree nahin thi atah unhone is ashanka se ki 3 jat ko bhi baari nuksaan hua he use peeche hatane kaa aadesh de diya isse 3 jat ke kaman aadhikari ko badi niraashaa hui or baad main unhe dograi par phir kabja karne ke liye badi keemat chukaani padi.
 8 disambar 1965 ko 5 maratha lit infentry kaa ek dasta ranneetik rup se mahatvapurn kasbe munaabaav main tainaat rajasthan sainya bal kly majbootee pradaan karne ke liye bheja gaya. unako pakistani sena ke paidal dste ko aage badhane se rokane kaa aadesh mila tha par ve keval apni chaowkee kii raksha hi kar paye pakistani sena ke topakhane se hui baari bambaari or hawaii or paidal sainya akraman ke bich 5 maratha ke jawaano ne badi veerta kaa parichay diya parinaam swaroop aaj us chaowkee kly maratha hill ke naam se janaa jaataa he. 5 maratha kii madad ke liye bheje gayi 3 gurkha or 954 baari topakhana kaa dasta pakistani vaayu sena ke baari hamale ke kaaran pahuch nahin paaya or rasad le kar barmer se aa rahi tren bhi garda road rail adde ke paas hamale kaa shikaar ho gayi 10 sitambar ko munaabao par pakistan kaa kabja ho gaya.
 9 sitambar ke baad kii ghatnaon ne dono deshon kii senaao ke sabase garvit khando kaa dambh chur chur kar diya. bharat ke 1 bakhtarband khand jise bhartiya sena kii shaan kaha jaataa tha ne sialkot kii disha main hamalaa kar diya. chhavinda main pakistan kii apekshaakrit kamjor 6 bakhtarband khand ne buree tarah haraa diya bhartiya sena ko kareeb kareeb 100 tanks gavaane pade or peeche hatane par majaboor hona padaa. isse utsahit hokar pakistan kii sena ne bharatiyon par pratiakraman kar diya or bhartiya seemaa main aage ghus aayi. apane antim aakraamak ke liye pakistan apane pehla bakhtarband divijan or 11vaan infantry divijan ke saath amritsar par kabje ke iraade se khemkaran par hamalaa kar diya. unke anusaar amritsar ke baad jalandhar or phir raashtrapati ayub khan kii taraf se aaye bayaan ke anusaar dilli aglaa lakshya hota. pakistani sena khemkaran se aage babbti hi ki asal uttar gaanv ) ke paas bharat kaa chauthaa mountain divijan, 7 mountain brigade, 62 mountain brigade, shermen tanks se susajjit deccan horse, apane anya divijan ke saath yuddh ke liye khada tha. or yahan in donon ke bich dusren vishvayudhd ke baad sabase badi tanks kii ladaai ladi gai, jisamen pakistan ki jabardast haar hui. usne apane 97 tanks kho diye, jisamen 72 paton tanks shaamil the; iske alaava 32 tanks chalati haalat main kabja kar liya gaya. jahaan isse pehle aage chal rahi pakistani sena asal uttar ke yudhd main haarane se bharat ke paksh main yuddh kaa santulan jhuk gaya. iske baad yah jagah america main bane paton naam ke pakistani tanko ke upar paton nagar ke naam se janaa jane laga. is ladaai ke baad pakistan kii pehali bakhtarband divijan ko waapas sialkot bhej diya gaya jahaan phir usne yuddh main aage bhaag nahin liya.
 is samay tak yuddh main tehraav aa gaya tha or dono desh apane dwaara jite hue ilaako kii raksha main zyada dhyaan de rahe the. ladaai main bhartiya sena ke 3000 or pakistani sena ke 3800 jawan shahid ho chuke the. bharat ne yuddh main 710 varg kilometre ilaake main or pakistan ne 210 varg kilometre ilaake main kabja kar liya tha. bharat ke kbje main sialkot, lahore or kashmir ke upjau ilaake the, jabaki pakistan ke kabje main sindh or chamb ke banjar ilaake the. 
 is yuddh main aazaadee ke baad pehali baar bhartiya vaayu sena evam pakistani vaayu sena ke vimaanon ne ek dusre kaa muqabla kiya. isse pehle in donon vaayu-senaaon ne 1940 ke dashak main pratham kashmir yuddh main hissaa liya tha jisamen ki 1965 yuddh kii tulana main inkaa yogadan bahut kam or keval parivahan tak hi simit tha.
 bhartiya vaayu sena ke paas badi sankhya main hoker hunter, bharat main nirmit folland nait, de havilland vempaire, i i canberra bamavarshak or mig-21 kii ek squadran thi. pakistani vaayu sena ke fadter plane the- 102 F-86F saibar or 12 F-104 starfiter, or 24 B-57 canberra bamavarshak. sangharsh ke dauraan bharat or pakistan vaayu senaaon kaa anupaat 5:1 tha. halanki yuddh main donon vayusenaayen samaan thim, kyonki china ke yuddh main pravesh karne kii sambhaavna se bachane ke liye adhiktar bhartiya vaayu sena purv kii ore tainaat thi.
 pakistani vimaan zyaadaatar america the, jabaki bharat ke paas soviet va europea vimaanon kaa mila jula bedaa tha. aisa bahut prasaarit tha ki pakistan ke america vimaan bharat ke vimaanon se behatar hai, lekin kich visheshgyon ke anusaar yah sahi nahin tha kyonki bhartiya vaayu sena ke mig 21, hoker hunter or folland nait fiter kii parformens unke pratidwandvi pakistan ke F-86 saibar se behatar thi. yuddh main pakistan kii nan0 19 squadran kaa netritv karne vaale air commander sajaad haidar ke anusaar- haalaanki bhartiya vayusena ke vempaire fiter vimaan F-86 saibar ke mukaable puraane or kamazor the, lekin hunter vimaan shakti evam gati donon main hi unase behatar the.
 bharatiyon ke anusaar F-86 chote se folland nait ke saamne kamazor tha jiske kaaran in vimaanon ko "saibar naashak" kaha jane laga tha. pakistan vayusena kaa F-104 starfiter upmahadweep main us samay kaa sabase tej gati kaa fiter vimaan tha or use praayah "pakistan vayusena kaa garv" kaha jaataa tha. lekin sajaad haidar ke anusaar ve vimaan is sammaan ke laayak nahin the kyonki ye "40,000 feet se adhik kii oonchai par udne vaale soviet bamavarshakon ko rokane va muqabla karne ke udeshy" se bane the, naa ki kam oonchaai par tej tarraar fiter vimaanon ke saath ladane ke liye. atah ye us samay ke maahaul ke upyukt nahin the." bhartiya vayusena starfiter kii vajah se chintit thi, kintu ladaai main ye utane prabhavi sabit nahin hue jitne ki kahin adhik dhime kintu kahin adhik furtile,folland nait fiter.phir bhi saibar or nats ke bich chale dwand yuddh main supersonic gati ke saath, saibar kahi zyada safal rahaa.
 donon deshon ne ladaai main hue nuksaan ke ek-duusare ke vipareet daawey kiye hai tathaa kuch hi tatasth sutron ne unka satyaapan kiya he. pakistani vayusena kaa daawa tha ki usne bharat ke 104 vimaan giraae or apane 19 vimaan khoe, jabaki bhartiya vayusena ne daawa kiya ki unhone pakistan ke 73 vimaan giraae or apane 35 vimaan khoe. ek tatasth strot ke anusaar, yuddh samaapti ke sheeghra baad hi hui ek parade main pakistani vayusena ne 86 F-86 saibar, 10 F-104 starfiter, or 20 B-57 canberra vimaan udaae jisase ki bhartiya vayusena kaa 73 pakistani vimaan giraane kaa daawa galat prathit hota he, jo ki us samay pakistan kii ladaaku vimaanon kii lagbhag sampurna pratham pankti thi. 
 pakistan vayusena ke keval ek squadran ko khone ke daavon ko, bhartiya sutron ne nakaarte hue bataaya he ki, pakistan ne shuruuaati yuddh ke 10 dinon ke bheetar hi indonesia, iraq, iran, turki or china se atirikt vimaan hasil karne kii maang kii thi.
 swatantra sutron ke anusaar, pieef ne kuch 20 vimaan kho die the jabaki bharatiyon ne 60-75 vimaan kho diye the. pakistan ne yuddh kii samaapti tak apni 17 pratishat agrim pankti kii takat kho di, jabaki bharat kaa nuksaan 10 pratishat se bhi kam tha. iske alaava, yah anumaan lagaaya gaya he ki yadi sangharsh teen saptaah tak or chalati to pakistani nuksaan main 33 pratishat kii or badhotaree hoti or bharat kaa nuksaan 15 pratishat hota.
 1965 ke yuddh main dwitiya vishwayuddh ke baad tinkon ke sabase bade yuddh lade gaye. . At the beginning of the war, the Pakistani Army had both a numerical advantage in tanks, as well as better equipment overall. Pakistani armour was largely American-made; it consisted mainly of Patton M-47 and M-48 tanks, but also included many M4 Sherman tanks, some M24 Chaffee light tanks and M36 Jackson tank destroyers, equipped with 90 mm guns. The bulk of India's tank fleet were older M4 Sherman tanks; some were up-gunned with the French high velocity CN 75 50 guns and could hold their own, whilst some older models were still equipped with the inferior 75 mm M3 L/40 gun. Besides the M4 tanks, bharat fielded the British-made Centurion Tank Mk 7, with the 105 mm Royal Ordnance L7 gun, and the AMX-13, PT-76, and M3 Stuart light tanks. Pakistan fielded a greater number and more modern artillery; its guns out-ranged those of the Indian artillery, according to Pakistan's Major General T.H. Malik.
 At the outbreak of war in 1965, Pakistan had about 15 armoured cavalry regiments, each with about 45 tanks in three squadrons. Besides the Pattons, there were about 200 M4 Shermans re-armed with 76 mm guns, 150 M24 Chaffee light tank and a few independent squadrons of M36B1 tank destroyers. Most of these regiments served in Pakistan's two armoured divisions, the 1st and 6th Armoured divisions – the latter being in the process of formation.
 The Indian Army of the time possessed 17 cavalry regiments, and in the 1950s had begun modernizing them by the acquisition of 164 AMX-13 light tanks and 188 Centurions. The remainder of the cavalry units were equipped with M4 Shermans and a small number of M3A3 Stuart light tanks. India had only a single armoured division, the 1st 'Black Elephant' Armoured Division, also called 'Fakhr-i-Hind', which consisted of the 17th Cavalry, the 4th Hodson's Horse, the 16th 'Black Elephant' Cavalry, the 7th Light Cavalry, the 2nd Lancers, the 18th Cavalry and the 62nd Cavalry, the two first named being equipped with Centurions. There was also the 2nd Independent Armoured Brigade, one of whose three regiments, the 3rd Cavalry, was also equipped with Centurions.
 Despite the qualitative and numerical superiority of Pakistani armour, Pakistan was outfought on the battlefield by India, which made progress into the Lahore-Sialkot sector, whilst halting Pakistan's counteroffensive on Amritsar.; they were sometimes employed in a faulty manner, such as charging prepared defenses during the defeat of Pakistan's 1st Armoured Division at Assal Uttar.
 Although India's tank formations experienced same results, bharat's attack at the Battle of Chawinda, led by its 1st Armored Division and supporting units, was brought to a grinding halt by the newly raised 6th Armoured Division in the Chawinda sector. The Indians lost 120 tanks at Chawinda. One true winner to emerge was India's Centurion battle tank, with its 105 mm gun and heavy armour, which proved superior to the overly complex Pattons and their exaggerated reputations. However, in the Sialkot sector outnumbered Pattons performed exceedingly well in the hands of the 25th Cavalry and other regiments of the 6th Armoured Division, which exacted a disproportionately heavy toll of Centurions from the Poona Horse and Hodson's Horse. The Indian Army has made much of the fact that some of its Centurions survived repeated hits; yet have failed to point out that the majority of tanks in the Sialkot sector were Shermans whose guns were inadequate even in 1944. Neither the Indian nor Pakistani Army showed any great facility in the use of armoured formations in offensive operations, whether the Pakistani 1st Armoured Division at Asal Uttar or the Indian 1st Armoured Division at Chawinda. In contrast, both proved adept with smaller forces in a defensive role such a the 2nd Armoured Brigade at Asal Uttar and the 25th Cavalry at Chawinda, where they defeated their better equipped but clumsier foes
 The navies of India and Pakistan did not play a prominent role in the war of 1965, although Pakistani accounts dispute this. On September 7, a flotilla of the Pakistani Navy carried out a small scale bombardment of the Indian coastal town and radar station of Dwarka, which was 200 miles south of the Pakistani port of Karachi. Codenamed Operation Dwarka, it did not fulfill its primary objective of disabling the radar station and there was no immediate retaliatory response from India. Later, some of the Indian fleet sailed from Bombay to Dwarka to patrol the area and deter further bombardment. Foreign authors have noted that the "insignificant bombardment" of the town was a "limited engagement, with no strategic value."
 According to some Pakistani sources, one submarine, PNS Ghazi, kept the Indian Navy's aircraft carrier INS Vikrant besieged in Bombay throughout the war. Indian sources claim that it was not their intention to get into a naval conflict with Pakistan, and wished to restrict the war to a land-based conflict. Moreover, they note that the Vikrant was in dry dock in the process of refitting. Some Pakistani defence writers have also discounted claims that the Indian Navy was bottled up in Bombay by a single submarine, instead stating that 75% of the Indian Navy was under maintenance in harbour.
 The Pakistan Army launched a number of covert operations to infiltrate and sabotage Indian airbases. On September 7, 1965, the Special Services Group commandos were parachuted into enemy territory. According to Chief of Army Staff General Musa Khan, about 135 commandos were airdropped at three Indian airfields. The daring attempt proved to be an "unmitigated disaster". Only 22 commandos returned to Pakistan as planned, 93 were taken prisoner, and 20 were killed in encounters with the army, police or civilians The reason for the failure of the commando mission is attributed to the failure to provide maps, proper briefings and adequate planning or preparation
 Despite failing to sabotage the airfields, Pakistan sources claim that the commando mission affected some planned Indian operations. As the Indian 14th Infantry Division was diverted to hunt for paratroopers, the Pakistan Air Force found the road filled with transport, and destroyed many vehicles.
 India responded to the covert activity by announcing rewards for captured Pakistani spies or paratroopers. Meanwhile, in Pakistan, rumors spread that India had retaliated with its own covert operations, sending commandos deep into Pakistan territory, but these rumors were later determined to be unfounded.
 apni or duusare kii haani ke bare main bharat or pakistan donon ne bilkul bemail daawey kiye. donon deshon ke daavon kii sankshipt sarini is prakaar he
 There have been several neutral assessments of the losses incurred by both India and Pakistan during the war. Most of these assessments agree that India had a upper hand over Pakistan when ceasefire was declared. Some of the neutral assessments are mentioned below —
 The war was militarily inconclusive; each side held prisoners and some territory belonging to the other. Losses were relatively heavy—on the Pakistani side, twenty aircraft, 200 tanks, and 3,800 troops. Pakistan's army had been able to withstand Indian pressure, but a continuation of the fighting would only have led to further losses and ultimate defeat for Pakistan. Most Pakistanis, schooled in the belief of their own martial prowess, refused to accept the possibility of their country's military defeat by "Hindu India" and were, instead, quick to blame their failure to attain their military aims on what they considered to be the ineptitude of Ayub Khan and his government.
 Severely mauled by the larger Indian armed forces, Pakistan could continue the fight only by teaming up with Red China and turning its back on the U.N.
 The invading Indian forces outfought their Pakistani counterparts and halted their attack on the outskirts of Lahore, Pakistan's second-largest city. By the time sanyukt raashtra intervened on September 22, Pakistan had suffered a clear defeat.
 The superior Indian forces, however, won a decisive victory and the army could have even marched on into Pakistani territory had external pressure not forced both combatants to cease their war efforts.
 In three weeks the second Indo-Pak War ended in what appeared to be a draw when the embargo placed by Washington on U.S. ammunition and replacements for both armies forced cessation of conflict before either side won a clear victory. India, however, was in a position to inflict grave damage to, if not capture, Pakistan's capital of the Punjab when the cease-fire was called, and controlled Kashmir's strategic Uri-Poonch bulge, much to Ayub's chagrin.
 India won the war. It gained 1,840 square kilometers of Pakistani territory: 640 square kilometers in Azad Kashmir, Pakistan's portion of the state; 460 square kilometers of the Sailkot sector; 380 square kilometers far to the south of Sindh; and most critical, 360 square kilometers on the Lahore front. Pakistan took 540 square kilometers of Indian territory: 490 square kilometers in the Chhamb sector and 50 square kilometers around Khem Karan.these are not correct pls review
 Although both sides lost heavily in men and material, and neither gained a decisive military advantage, bharat had the better of the war. nai dilli achieved its basic goal of thwarting Pakistan's attempt to seize Kashmir by force. Pakistan gained nothing from a conflict which it had instigated.
 India's strategic aims were modest – it aimed to deny Pakistani Army victory, although it ended up in possession of 720 varg mile of Pakistani territory for the loss of just 220 varg mile of its own.
 A brief but furious 1965 war with India began with a covert Pakistani thrust across the Kashmiri cease-fire line and ended up with the city of Lahore threatened with encirclement by Indian Army. Another UN-sponsored cease-fire left borders unchanged, but Pakistan's vulnerability had again been exposed.
 The 1965 Indo-Pak war lasted barely a month. Pakistan made gains in the Rajasthan desert but its main push against India's Jammu-Srinagar road link was repulsed and Indian tanks advanced to within a sight of Lahore. Both sides claimed victory but India had most to celebrate.
 Again India appeared, logistically at least, to be in a superior position but neither side was able to mobilize enough strength to gain a decisive victory.
 By just the end of the week, in fact, it was clear that the Pakistanis were more than holding their own.
 sanyukt rajya america or soviet sangh ne donon dakshin asian deshon ke bich sangharsh main or vruddhi ko rokane ke liye mahatvapurn rajanyik upkaran kaa upyog kiya. premier alexi kosiyan ke netritv main soviet sangh ne taashkand main yudhviram kii vaarta kii mejabani kii, jahaan bhartiya pradhan mantri laal bahadur shastri or pakistani raashtrapati ayub khan ne taashkand samjhaute par hastakshar kiye, 25 farvari 1966 ke baad se agast ke purv main senaayen waapas lene ke liye sahamat hue.
 With declining stockpiles of ammunition, Pakistani leaders feared the war tilting in India's favor. Therefore, they quickly accepted the ceasefire in Tashkent. Despite strong opposition from Indian military leaders, bharat budged to growing international diplomatic pressure and accepted the ceasefire. On September 22, the sanyukt raashtra Security Council unanimously passed a resolution that called for an unconditional ceasefire from both nations. The war ended the following day.
 India's Prime Minister, Shastri, suffered a fatal heart attack soon after the declaration of the ceasefire. As a consequence, the public outcry in India against the ceasefire declaration transformed into a wave of sympathy for the ruling Indian National Congress. The ceasefire was criticized by many Pakistanis who, relying on fabricated official reports and the controlled Pakistani press, believed that the leadership had surrendered military gains. The protests led to student riots. Pakistan State's reports had suggested that their military was performing admirably in the war – which they incorrectly blamed as being initiated by India – and thus the Tashkent Declaration was seen as having forfeited the gains. Some recent books written by Pakistani authors, including one by ex-ISI chief titled "The Myth of 1965 Victory", allegedly exposed Pakistani fabrications about the war, but all copies of the book were bought by Pakistan Army to prevent publication because the topic was "too sensitive".
 India and Pakistan accused each other of ceasefire violations; India charged Pakistan with 585 violations in 34 days, while Pakistan countered with accusations of 450 incidents by India. In addition to the expected exchange of small arms and artillery fire, bharat reported that Pakistan utilized the ceasefire to capture the Indian village of Chananwalla in the Fazilka sector. This village was recaptured by Indian troops on 25 December. On October 10, a B-57 Canberra on loan to the PAF was damaged by 3 SA-2 missiles fired from the IAF base at Ambala. A Pakistani Army Auster was shot down on 16 disambar killing one Pakistani army captain and on 2 farvari 1967, an AOP was shot down by IAF Hunters.
 The ceasefire remained in effect until the start of the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971.
 bharat or pakistan donon kii taraf se hui kai ranneetik galatiyon ke kaaran yah yuddh benatija si sthiti main aa pahunchaa.
 Indian military intelligence gave no warning of the impending Pakistan invasion. The Indian Army failed to recognize the presence of heavy Pakistani artillery and armaments in Chumb and suffered significant losses as a result.
 The "Official History of the 1965 War", drafted by the Ministry of Defence of India in 1992, was a long suppressed document that revealed other miscalculations. According to the document, on September 22 when the Security Council was pressing for a ceasefire, the Indian Prime Minister asked commanding Gen. Chaudhuri if India could possibly win the war, were he to delay accepting the ceasefire. The general replied that most of India's frontline ammunition had been used up and the Indian Army had suffered considerable tank losses. It was determined later that only 14% of India's frontline ammunition had been fired and India held twice the number of tanks as Pakistan. By this time, the Pakistani Army had used close to 80% of its ammunition.
 Air Chief Marshal P.C. Lal, who was the Vice Chief of Air Staff during the conflict, points to the lack of coordination between the IAF and the Indian army. Neither side revealed its battle plans to the other. The battle plans drafted by the Ministry of Defence and General Chaudhari, did not specify a role for the Indian Air Force in the order of battle. This attitude of Gen. Chaudhari was referred to by ACM Lal as the "Supremo Syndrome", a patronizing attitude sometimes held by the Indian army towards the other branches of the Indian Military.
 The Pakistani Army's failures started with the supposition that a generally discontented Kashmiri people, given the opportunity provided by the Pakistani advance, would revolt against their Indian rulers, bringing about a swift and decisive surrender of Kashmir. The Kashmiri people, however, did not revolt. Instead, the Indian Army was provided with enough information to learn of Operation Gibraltar and the fact that the Army was battling not insurgents, as they had initially supposed, but Pakistani Army regulars.
 The Pakistani Army also failed to recognize that the Indian policy makers would order an attack on the southern sector in order to open a second theater of conflict. Pakistan was forced to dedicate troops to the southern sector to protect Sialkot and Lahore instead using them to support penetrating into Kashmir.
 "Operation Grand Slam", which was launched by Pakistan to capture Akhnoor, a town north-east of Jammu and a key region for communications between Kashmir and the rest of India, was also a failure. Many Pakistani commentators criticized the Ayub Khan administration for being indecisive during Operation Grand Slam. These critics claim that the operation failed because Ayub Khan knew the importance of Akhnur to India and did not want to capture it and drive the two nations into an all-out war. Despite progress being made in Akhnur, General Ayub Khan relieved the commanding Major General Akhtar Hussain Malik and replaced him with Gen. Yahya Khan. A 24-hour lull ensued the replacement, which allowed the Indian army to regroup in Akhnur and successfully oppose a lackluster attack headed by General Yahya Khan. "The enemy came to our rescue", asserted the Indian Chief of Staff of the Western Command. Later, Akhtar Hussain Malik criticized Ayub Khan for planning Operation Gibraltar, which was doomed to fail, and for relieving him of his command at a crucial moment in the war. Malik threatened to expose the truth about the war and the army's failure, but later dropped the idea for fear of being banned.
 Some authors have noted that Pakistan might have been emboldened by a war game – conducted in March 1965, at the Institute of Defence Analysis, USA. The exercise concluded that, in the event of a war with India, Pakistan would win. Other authors like Stephen Philip Cohen, have consistently commented that the Pakistan Army had "acquired an exaggerated view of the weakness of both India and the Indian military... the 1965 war was a shock".
 Pakistani air marshall va commander in chif of PAF during the war, nur khan, later said thgnf fhfhfffhn Army, and not India, should be blamed for starting the war. However propaganda in Pakistan about the war continued; the war was not rationally analyzed in Pakistan, with most of the blame being heaped on the leadership and little importance given to intelligence failures that persisted until the debacle of the 1971 war, when then East Pakistan was invaded by India and seceded from West Pakistan, leading to the creation of Bangladesh. hghginj ujjjjfhffuhhh
 Pakistan and the United States had signed an Agreement of Cooperation in 1959 under which the United States agreed to take "appropriate action, including the use of armed forces" in order to assist the Government of Pakistan at its request. However, following the start of the 1965 war, the United States was of the view that the conflict was largely Pakistan's fault and therefore, it cut all military supplies to the country. However, Pakistan did receive significant support from Iran, Indonesia and People's Republic of China.
 Both before and during the war, the People's Republic of China had been a major military associate of Pakistan and had invariably admonished India, with whom it had fought a war in 1962. There were also reports of Chinese troop movements on the Indian border to support Pakistan. As such, bharat agreed to the UN mandate in order to avoid a war on both borders.
 India's participation in the Non-Aligned Movement yielded little support from its members. Despite close relations between with India, the Soviet Union was more neutral than most other nations during the war and even invited both nations to talks that it would host in Tashkent.
 Despite the declaration of a ceasefire, bharat was perceived as the victor due to its success in halting the Pakistan-backed insurgency in Kashmir. In its October 1965 issue, the TIME magazine quoted a Western official assessing the consequences of the war —
 Now it's apparent to everybody that India is going to emerge as an Asian power in its own right.
 In light of the failures of the Sino-Indian War, the outcome of the 1965 war was viewed as a "politico-strategic" victory in India. The Indian premier, Lal Bahadur Shastri, was hailed as a national hero in India.
 While the overall performance of the Indian military was praised, military leaders were criticized for their failure to effectively deploy India's superior armed forces so as to achieve a decisive victory over Pakistan. In his book "War in the modern world since 1815", noted war historian Jeremy Black said that though Pakistan "lost heavily" during the 1965 war, bharat's hasty decision to call for negotiations prevented further considerable damage to the Pakistan Armed Forces. He elaborates —
 India's chief of army staff urged negotiations on the ground that they were running out ammunition and their number of tanks had become seriously depleted. In fact, the army had used less than 15% of its ammunition compared to Pakistan, which had consumed closer to 80 percent and India had double the number of serviceable tanks.
 As a consequence, bharat focussed on enhancing communication and coordination within and among the triservices of the Indian Armed Forces. Partly as a result of the inefficient information gathering preceding the war, bharat established the Research and Analysis Wing for external espionage and intelligence. Major improvements were also made in command and control to address various shortcomings and the positive impact of these changes was clearly visible during the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 when India achieved a decisive victory over Pakistan within two weeks.
 China's repeated threats to intervene in the conflict in support of Pakistan increased pressure on the government to take an immediate decision to develop nuclear weapons. Despite repeated assurances, the United States did little to prevent extensive use of American arms by Pakistani forces during the conflict which irked India. At the same time, the United States and United Kingdom refused to supply India with sophisticated weaponry which further strained the relations between the West and India. These developments led to a significant change in India's foreign policy — India, which had previously championed the cause of non-alignment, distanced itself further from Western powers and developed close relations with the Soviet Union. By the end of 1960s, the Soviet Union emerged as the biggest supplier of military hardware to India. From 1967 to 1977, 81% of India's arms imports were from the Soviet Union. After the 1965 war, the arms race between India and Pakistan became even more asymmetric and India was outdistancing Pakistan by far.
 At the conclusion of the war, many Pakistanis considered the performance of their military to be positive. September 6 is celebrated as 'Defence Day' in Pakistan, in commemoration of the successful defence of Lahore against the Indian army. The performance of the Pakistani Air Force, in particular, was praised.
 However, the Pakistani government was accused by foreign analysts of spreading disinformation among its citizens regarding the actual consequences of the war. In his book "Mainsprings of Indian and Pakistani foreign policies", S.M. Burke writes —
 After the Indo-Pakistani war of 1965 the balance of military power had decisively shifted in favor of India. Pakistan had found it difficult to replace the heavy equipment lost during that conflict while her adversary, despite her economic and political problems, had been determinedly building up her strength.
 Most observers agree that the myth of a mobile, hard hitting Pakistan Army was badly dented in the war, as critical breakthroughs were not made. Several Pakistani writers criticized the military's ill-founded belief that their "martial race" of soldiers could defeat "Hindu India" in the war. Rasul Bux Rais, a Pakistani political analyst wrote –
 The 1965 war with India proved that Pakistan could neither break the formidable Indian defenses in a blitzkrieg fashion nor could she sustain an all-out conflict for long.
 Moreover, Pakistan had lost more ground than it had gained during the war and, more importantly, failed to achieve its goal of occupying Kashmir; this result has been viewed by many impartial observers as a defeat for Pakistan.
 Many high ranking Pakistani officials and military experts later criticized the faulty planning of Operation Gibraltar that ultimately led to the war. The Tashkent declaration was also criticized in Pakistan, though few citizens realised the gravity of the situation that existed at the end of the war. Political leaders were also criticized. Following the advice of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, Pakistan's foreign minister, Ayub Khan had raised very high expectations among the people of Pakistan about the superiority – if not invincibility – of its armed forces, but Pakistan's inability to attain its military aims during the war, created a political liability for Ayub. The defeat of its Kashmiri ambitions in the war led to the army's invincibility being challenged by an increasingly vocal opposition.
 One of the most far reaching consequences of the war was the wide-scale economic slowdown in Pakistan. The cost of the 1965 war put an end to the impressive period economic growth Pakistan had experienced during early 1960s. Between 1964 and 1966, Pakistan's defence spending rose from 4.82% to 9.86% of GDP, putting tremendous strain on Pakistan's economy. By 1970–71, defence spending comprised a whopping 55.66% of government expenditure.
 Pakistan was surprised by the lack of support by the United States, an ally with whom the country had signed an Agreement of Cooperation. USA declared its neutrality in the war by cutting off military supplies to both sides, leading Islamabad to believe that they were "betrayed" by the United States. After the war, Pakistan would increasingly look towards China as a major source of military hardware and political support.
 Another negative consequence of the war was the growing resentment against the Pakistani government in East Pakistan, particularly for West Pakistan's obsession with Kashmir. Bengali leaders accused the central government of not providing adequate security for East Pakistan during the conflict, even though large sums of money were taken from the east to finance the war for Kashmir. In fact, despite some Pakistan Air Force attacks being launched from bases in East Pakistan during the war, bharat did not retaliate in that sector, although East Pakistan was defended only by an understrenghted infantry division, sixteen planes and no tanks. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was critical of the disparity in military resources deployed in East and West Pakistan, calling for greater autonomy for East Pakistan, which ultimately led to the Bangladesh Liberation war and another war between India and Pakistan in 1971.
 saanchaa:pakistani sena
