 a thaujend spalandid sanas
 a thaujend spalandid sanas afgaan mul ke america lekhak khalid husaini kaa 2007 main rachit ek charchit upanyaas he. 2003 main da kit ranor naam ke sarvaadhik bikri vaale upanyaas se aagaaz ke baad yah unki duusari kriti he . is kahani ke kathanak main mariyam ek avaidh bacchee, jo apane janm se sambandhit kalank evam uske dushprabhav se peedit vyavhaar kaa saamana apane vaivaahik jivan ke dauraan karti he | mariyam ke janm ke ek peedi baad paidaa hui laila ko tulanaatmak rup se, yuvavastha tak kai visheshadhikaar praapt hote he lekin unki jivan rekha tab ek duusare ko katati he,jab laila ko mariyam ke pati raashid se shaadi karne ke liye majaboor kiya jaataa he.
 husaini ke anusaar yah kahani unke pratham upanyaas “da kit ranor“ jo "pita-putr kahani" hai, ke vipareet yah "maa-beti kahani" he .
 is upanyaas kaa sheershak 17 veen shatabdi ke irani kavi saib tabriji rachit kavita "kabul" ke anuwaad se liya gaya he :
 Oh, the beautiful city of Kabul wears a rugged mountain skirt,And the rose is jealous of its lash-like thorns.The dust of Kabul's blowing soil smarts lightly in my eyes,But I love her, for knowledge and love both come from her dust.
 I sing bright praises to her colourful tulips,The beauty of her trees makes me blush.How sparkling the water flows from Pul-i-Mastaan!May Allah protect such beauty from the evil eye of man!
 Khizr chose Kabul to Paradise,For her mountains brought him near to heaven's delights.The fort's dragon-sprawling walls guard the city well,Each brick is more precious than the treasure of Shayagan.
 Every street in Kabul fascinates the eye.In the bazaars, Egypt's caravans pass by.No one can count the beauteous moons on her rooftops,
 'And hundreds of lovely suns hide behind her walls.'
 Her morning's laugh is as gay as flowers,Her dark nights shine like beautiful hair.Her tuneful nightingales sing with flame in their notes,Fiery songs like burning leaves, fall from their throats.
 I sing to the gardens, Jahanara and Sharbara.Even the tuba of Paradise is jealous of their greenery.
 "Every street of Kabul is enthralling to the eyeThrough the bazaars, caravans of Egypt passOne could not count the moons that shimmer on her roofsAnd the thousand splendid suns that hide behind her walls”
 
 saanchaa:acha lekh
