 rashtriya film puraskaar - sarvshereshth nrity sangyojan ye rashtriya film puraskaar ki ek shrenee hai. is shrenee ke vijeta ko film main nrityrachana ke kaary ke liye rajat camel pradaan kiya jaataa hai.
 yah puraskaar 1991 main 39wein rashtriya film puraskaron par sthapit kiya gaya tha lekin 40wein rashtriya film puraskaron par pehali baar pradaan kiya gaya tha.
 For successfully adapting a popular folk theatre form to the screen.
 For the orchestration of scores of dancers in unison, with massive sets, stunning light effects and foot thumping music.
 shaleen or bhavpurn mohak nritykala samakaleen or bhartiya samskruti ki prathaon ko nibhaane main paramparanukool hone ke liye 
 For her simply graceful and imaginative compositions of the dance sequence.
 For sensual body language is par excellence and appropriate to unique choreographic patterns.
 For the striking and aesthetic use of color and design in the film with both elements enriching its rhythm and dance movement.
 For the spirited and novel adaptation of an arabic dance.
 For combining musical elements in the dance number skilfully composed by the choreographer to enrich visual opulence.
 For the classical dance number skilfully composed, creating the symbiotic dance in keeping with our rich traditions and heritage.
 For choreography of that particular song is very lively and skifully composed keeping our tradition and heritage in mind.
 For her creation of captivating dance movements to reflect the spirit of the characters and the period.
 For its seamless weaving of different dance styles, in the best traditions of the musical.
 For his imaginative, spectacular and rhythmic dance composition.
 For authentic recreation of the devdasi tradition that has been brought out with immense grace and beauty.
 For choreography that displays modern and innovative aesthetics in rhythm and movement.
 For the lively depiction of a colourful local hill song against a mountainous backdrop.
 For its extravagant and dreamlike treatment of celebrations on a magnificent scale.
 For breath taking energy and innovation.
 For the native charm and innovative design in the art of choreography that creates an effervescent energy in the spectator.
 For the innovative blending of a realistic dance event in Spain and the appearance of the primary characters on location. They effortlessly mixes the tradition of professional Flamenco dancing with the capabilities and styles of the Indian actors.
 Artistically pleasing choreography, maintaining purity of the Kathak dance form by this veteran has added an extra dimension to the characterization of the lead actor.
 For effectively using young soldiers and just the props available within the barracks to create a rugged and exuberant dance.
 For the evocative fusion of performative grammars, interweaving a staccato whirling of masculinised bodies with larger than life puppets, to create a dance that is firmly embedded within the narrative."
 For creating enchanting moves that expresses anguish of love, defying social barriers, resonating the core theme of the film.
 Visually appealing and with a definite flourish and finish to the dance moves.
