 aina akmtova ek roosi aadhunik kavi, sarvaadhik prashansit lekhakon main se ek thi.
 unki majboot or spasht agrani mahila aawaaj roosi kavita main ek nayaa hi raag maaraa he. unke lekhan ko do period main vitarit kar sakate hai - praarambhik kaam or uske baad kaa kaam, kam saahitiyik utpaadan ke ek dashak ke dwaara vibhajit kiya gaya he. unka kaam stalinavaadee adhikariyon ke dwaara ninda kiya gaya tha. vah rus main rahane ke liye or vahaan se utpravas 	nahi karne ke liye ullekhneey he, unke chaaron ore ke atyaacharon ke gavaah thi. unke vishyon main - samay par dhyaan or smriti or stalinavaadee ke antargat rahane kii or lekhan kii kathinaayee shaamil he.
 yuddh, kranti or record nasht hone ke karan aina ke jivan ke bare main jaankaree ke praathmik strot apekshaakrit alp hai. lambii avadhi ke liye vah sarkari aruchi main thi. bahut log jo unke kareeb the unki maut ho gayi.
 aina bolshoi main paidaa hui thi. unke ke pita unke "sammanjanak" naam ke antargat chhapi kisi bhi chand ko dekhnaa nahin chahta the. to unhone unki daadi kii saafe tatar kulanaam akmtova ko upnaam banaaya. aina ne 11 saal kii umr main kavita likhnaa shuru kar diya or use der se kishoravastha main prakashit kiya. vah nichole', jin raisin, alexander pushkin se prerit hui thi. 1912 main gild ke kaviyon ne unke kavita pustak ko prakashit kiya, pehle paanch nau saal me. uske baad se unhone apana kavita likhnaa jari rakhaa. vah soviet sangh ke dwaara sammanit ki gayi thi. unke 100 janmdin jashn manaane ke liye harvard vishvavidhyalay unke jivan or kaam par ek antarrashtriya sammelan yojit kiya. 
 khmetowe jayand the akmest group of powates in 1910 vit powates sach aas ossiep mandelstam aand serji gorodetski, varking in respons to the simblist skool, kankarant vit the grot of imgism in europe aand america. it pramoted the use of kraft aand rigras povatic form over mistisizam ore spirichuyal in-rods to kaanpozishan, fewring the kaancreet over the effemaral. khmetowe modeed its principuls of riting vit clerity, simplicity, aand disipplind form. her first kalekshans evening aand roseri risived wide critical aclem aand maid her femes from the start of her kariyar. the contand brif, psychologicli tot pisas, aklamd for der clusical dikashan, telling ditels, aand the sakilful use of color. evening aand her next four books var mostli lirik miniyecrers on the theme of love, shot thru vit sadnes. her arli powames yushuyali pikchar aa maan aand aa vuman involvd in the most paaynent, ambiguvas moment of der rilationship, much imitated aand letters parodid bai nabokove aand adars. critic roberta reader nots tat the arli powames oluys atructed large numbers of admiters: "for khmetowe vaaz able to kapchar aand kanve the vast range of evolving amotions experienced in aa love apher, from the first thrill of meeting, to aa dipaning love cantending vit hetrade, aand aventuyali to vailent distroctive pashan ore total indiference. but her powetry marks aa radical brake vit the arudit, ornet style aand the mistical rapracentation of love so tipical of powates like alegounder block aand andry beli. her liriks are compored of short fragments of simple spich tat do note form aa logical koherent pattern. insted, the riflact the ve ve akyuyali think, the links between the imejas are amotional, aand simple averide objects are charged vit psychological assosiyations. like alegounder pushkin, hu vaaz her model in maani wes, khmetowe vaaz intant on kanveying varlds of mining thru prisise ditels.
 khmetowe ofan compland tat the critics "wold her in" to der percepshan of her work in the arli yearz of romantic pashan, despite major chanjas of theme in the letters yearz of the teror. tees vaaz menli du to the sikret nechar of her work after the public aand critical effeyushan over her first wolums. the risks during the parajas var veri great. maani of her chlose frends aand family var egzild, imprirand ore shot; her son vaaz under constant threat of arest, shi vaaz ofan under chlose sarveylens. foloying artistic repressant aand public kondmnation bai the state in the 1920sa, maani vidin litreri aand public sarkals, at home aand abroad, thot shi had did. her readership generali did note no her letters opes, the railing pashan of requiem ore povem vidout aa hero aand her adar skeding works, wich var sherd onli vit aa veri trusted fu ore sarculated in sikret bai verde of maut .
  between 1935 aand 1940 khmetowe compored, workd aand reverkd the long povem requiem in sikret, aa lirical saaikal of lamentation aand vitaness, depicting the safaring of the kaaman pipal under soviet teror. shi karid it vit her aas shi workd aand livd in touns aand citis across the soviet union. it vaaz conspicuvasli absent from her colected works, givan its explisit kondmnation of the parajas. the work in russian finali apird in book form in munich in 1963, the hole work note publicd vidin yuyesesar antil 1987. it concists of ten numberd powames tat agzmin aa siris of amotional stats, exploring safaring, desper, divoshan, rather tan aa clear narative. biblical thims sach aas christ'sa krusificsshan aand the devastaton of meri, madar of jisas aand meri magadelene, riflact the rawejing of rashia.
